R-HSA-168276	 NS1 Mediated Effects on Host Pathways	Viral NS1 protein is a nuclear, dimeric protein that is highly expressed in infected cells and has dsRNA-binding activity. The RNA-binding domain lies within the N-terminal portion of the protein. The NS1 RNA-binding domain forms a symmetric homodimer with a six-helical fold. Mutational analysis has demonstrated that dimer formation is crucial for RNA-binding. The basic residues are believed to make contact with the phosphate backbone of the RNA which is consistent with an observed lack of sequence specificity. Neither NS1 nor its bound RNA undergo any significant structural changes upon binding. The NS1 dimer spans the minor groove of canonical A-form dsRNA. The non-RNA binding portion of NS1 has been termed the effector domain and includes binding sites for host cell poly (A)-binding protein II (PABII) and the 30kDa subunit of cleavage and polyadenylation specificity factor (CPSF).
R-HSA-164843	2-LTR circle formation	The formation of 2-LTR circles requires the action of the cellular non-homologous DNA end-joining pathway. Specifically the cellular Ku, XRCC4 and ligase IV proteins are needed. Evidence for this is provided by the observation that cells mutant in these functions do not support detectable formation of 2-LTR circles, though integration and formation of 1-LTR circles are mostly normal. The reaction takes place in the nucleus, and formation of 2-LTR circles has been used as a surrogate assay for nuclear transport. It has also been suggested that the NHEJ system affects the toxicity of retroviral infection.
R-HSA-157279	3' -UTR-mediated translational regulation	Translational control mechanisms often involve interactions between the 3' - or 5' -untranslated regions (UTRs) of mRNA and RNA-binding proteins. One such mechanism requires circularization of the mRNA molecule involving protein-protein interactions between the mRNA termini (Mazumder et al., 2001). While the circularization of mRNA during translation initiation is thought to contribute to an increase in the efficiency of translation, it also appears to provide a mechanism for translational silencing. This might be achieved by bringing inhibitory 3' UTR-binding proteins into a position in which they interfere either with the function of the translation initiation complex or with the assembly of the ribosome.
R-HSA-73843	5-Phosphoribose 1-diphosphate biosynthesis	5-Phospho-alpha-D-ribose 1-diphosphate (PRPP) is a key intermediate in both the de novo and salvage pathways of purine and pyrimidine synthesis. PRPP and the enzymatic activity responsible for its synthesis were first described by Kornberg et al. (1955). The enzyme, phosphoribosyl pyrophosphate synthetase 1, has been purified from human erythrocytes and characterized biochemically. The purified enzyme readily forms multimers; its smallest active form appears to be a dimer and for simplicity it is annotated as a dimer here. It specifically catalyzes the transfer of pyrophosphate from ATP or dATP to D-ribose 5-phosphate, and has an absolute requirement for Mg++ and orthophosphate (Fox and Kelley 1971; Roth et al. 1974). The significance of the reaction with dATP in vivo is unclear, as the concentration of cytosolic dATP is normally much lower than that of ATP. The importance of this enzyme for purine synthesis in vivo has been established by demonstrating excess phosphoribosyl pyrophosphate synthetase activity, correlated with elevated enzyme levels or altered enzyme properties, in individuals whose rates of uric acid production are constitutively abnormally high (Becker and Kim 1987; Roessler et al. 1993).<P>Molecular cloning studies have revealed the existence of two additional genes that encode phosphoribosyl pyrophosphate synthetase-like proteins, one widely expressed (phosphoribosyl pyrophosphate synthetase 2) and one whose expression appears to be confined to the testis (phosphoribosyl pyrophosphate synthetase 1-like 1) (Taira et al. 1989; 1991). Neither of these proteins has been purified and characterized enzymatically, nor have variations in the abundance or sequence of either protein been associated with alterations in human nucleotide metabolism (Roessler et al. 1993; Becker et al. 1996), so their dimerization and ability to catalyze the synthesis of PRPP from D-ribose 5-phosphate are inferred here on the basis of their predicted amino acid sequence similarity to phosphoribosyl pyrophosphate synthetase 1.
R-HSA-1971475	A tetrasaccharide linker sequence is required for GAG synthesis	The biosynthesis of dermatan sulfate/chondroitin sulfate and heparin/heparan sulfate glycosaminoglycans (GAGs) starts with the formation of a tetrasaccharide linker sequence to the core protein. The first step is the addition of xylose to the hydroxy group of specific serine residues on the core protein. Subsequent additions of two galactoses and a glucuronide moiety completes the linker sequence. From here, the next hexosamine addition is critical as it determines which GAG is formed (Lamberg & Stoolmiller 1974, Pavao et al. 2006).
R-HSA-157212	A third proteolytic cleavage releases NICD	The third proteolytic cleavage releases the Notch IntraCellular Domain (NICD) from the NEXT fragment. The catalyst for this cleavage is a membrane protease complex called gamma-secretase (GS). GS cleaves type I membrane proteins such as the Notch receptor and amyloid beta-protein precursor (APP, implicated in Alzheimer's disease). GS is made up of 4 components: Presenilin, nicastrin, APH-1 and PEN-2. Presenilins are homodimeric, multipass transmembrane proteins and are believed to be the catalytic core of GS. All aspartyl proteases have two catalytic aspartates and presenilin contains these residues. The others are essential cofactors for the correct function of GS.
R-HSA-2161541	Abacavir metabolism	Abacavir activation proceeds steps of phosphorylation, deamination to yield carbovir monophosphate, and phosphorylation of the latter compound to yield the triphosphate. In addition, abacavir can be conjugated with glucuronide or oxidized to its 5'-carboxylate derivative, the two major forms in which it is excreted from the body (Yuen et al. 2008).
R-HSA-2161517	Abacavir transmembrane transport	Cytosolic levels of abacavir are determined by the balance of its facilitated diffusion into the cell mediated by organic cation transporters SLC22A1, 2, and 3, and its ATP-dependent efflux from cells mediated by ABCG2 and ABCB1 (Klaasen and Aleksunes 2010; Pan et al. 2007; Shaik et al. 2007).
R-HSA-2161522	Abacavir transport and metabolism	Abacavir is a nucleoside analogue reverse transcriptase inhibitor with antiretroviral activity, widely used in combination with other drugs to treat HIV-1 infection (Yuen et al. 2008). Its uptake across the plasma membrane is mediated by organic cation transporters SLC22A1, 2, and 3; the transport proteins ABCB1 and ABCG2 mediate its efflux. Abacavir itself is a prodrug. Activation requires phosphorylation by a cytosolic adenosine phosphotransferase and deamination by ADAL deaminase to yield carbovir monophosphate. Cytosolic nucleotide kinases convert carbovir monophosphate to carbovir triphosphate, the active HIV reverse transcriptase inhibitor. Abacavir can be glucuronidated or oxidized to a 5'-carboxylate; these are the major forms in which it is excreted from the body.
R-HSA-73930	Abasic sugar-phosphate removal via the single-nucleotide replacement pathway	Abasic sugar phosphate removal via the single nucleotide replacement pathway requires displacement of DNA glycosylase by APEX1, APEX1-mediated endonucleolytic cleavage at the 5' side of the base free deoxyribose residue, recruitment of POLB to the AP site and excision of the abasic sugar phosphate (5'dRP) residue at the strand break (Lindahl and Wood, 1999).
R-HSA-5619084	ABC transporter disorders	The ATP-binding cassette (ABC) transporters form a large family of transmembrane proteins that utilise the energy from the hydrolysis of ATP to facilitate the movement of a wide variety of substrates against a concentration gradient across membrane bilayers. Substrates include amino acids, lipids, inorganic ions, peptides, saccharides, peptides for antigen presentation, metals, drugs, and proteins. Of the 48 known ABC transporters in humans, 15 are associated with a defined human disease (Tarling et al. 2013, Woodward et al. 2011, Dean 2005, Kemp et al. 2011, Ueda 2011, Chen & Tiwari 2011). 
R-HSA-1369062	ABC transporters in lipid homeostasis	A defined subset of the ABC transporter superfamily, the ABCA transporters, are highly expressed in monocytes and macrophages and are regulated by cholesterol flux which may indicate their role in in chronic inflammatory diseases (Schmitz and Kaminski 2001, Schmitz et al. 2000). Some D and G members of the ABC transporter family are also important in lipid transport (Voloshyna & Reiss 2011, Morita & Imanaka 2012, Morita et al. 2011).
R-HSA-382556	ABC-family proteins mediated transport	The ATP-binding cassette (ABC) superfamily of active transporters involves a large number of functionally diverse transmembrane proteins. They transport a variety of compounds through membranes against steep concentration gradients at the cost of ATP hydrolysis. These substrates include amino acids, lipids, inorganic ions, peptides, saccharides, peptides for antigen presentation, metals, drugs, and proteins. The ABC transporters not only move a variety of substrates into and out of the cell, but are also involved in intracellular compartmental transport. Energy derived from the hydrolysis of ATP is used to transport the substrate across the membrane against a concentration gradient. Human genome contains 48 ABC genes; 16 of these have a known function and 14 are associated with a defined human disease (Dean et al. 2001, Borst and Elferink 2002, Rees et al. 2009).
R-HSA-2978092	Abnormal conversion of 2-oxoglutarate to 2-hydroxyglutarate	Somatic mutations affecting arginine residue 132 of IDH1 (isocitrate dehydrogenase 1, a cytosolic enzyme that normally catalyzes the NADP+-dependent conversion of isocitrate to 2-oxoglutarate), are very commonly found in human glioblastomas (Parsons et al. 2008). These mutant proteins efficiently catalyze the NADPH-dependent reduction of 2-oxoglutarate to form 2-hydroxyglutarate. Cells expressing the mutant protein accumulate elevated levels of 2-hydroxyglutarate, probably in the cytosol as IDH1 is a cytosolic enzyme. The fate of the 2-hydroxyglutarate is unclear, but the high frequency with which the mutation is found in surveys of primary tumors is consistent with the possibility that it is advantageous to the tumor cells (Dang et al 2009).
R-HSA-167242	Abortive elongation of HIV-1 transcript in the absence of Tat	This event was inferred from the corresponding Reactome human Poll II transcription elongation event. The details specific to HIV-1 transcription elongation are described below. In the absence of the HIV-1 Tat protein, the RNA Pol II complexes associated with the HIV-1 template are non-processive. RNA Pol II is arrested after promoter clearance by the negative transcriptional elongation factors DSIF and NELF as occurs during early elongation of endogenous templates (Wada et al, 1998; Yamaguchi et al. 1999). This arrest cannot be overcome by P-TEFb mediated phosphorylation in the absence of Tat however, and elongation aborts resulting in the accumulation of short transcripts (Kao et al., 1987).
R-HSA-156582	Acetylation	N-acetyltransferases (NATs; EC 2.3.1.5) utilize acetyl Co-A in acetylation conjugation reactions. This is the preferred route of conjugating aromatic amines (R-NH2, converted to aromatic amides R-NH-COCH3) and hydrazines (R-NH-NH2, converted to R-NH-NH-COCH3). Aliphatic amines are not substrates for NAT. The basic reaction is<br><p><b>Acetyl-CoA + an arylamine = CoA + an N- acetylarylamine</b></p><br>NATs are cytosolic and in humans, 2 isoforms are expressed, NAT1 and NAT2. A third isoform, NATP, is a pseudogene and is not expressed. The NAT2 gene contains mutations that decrease NAT2 activity. This mutations was first seen as <i>slow acetylation</i> compared to the normal, <i>fast acetylation</i> of the antituberculosis drug isoniazid. Incidence of the slow acetylator phenotype is high in Middle Eastern populations (70%), average (50%) in Europeans, Americans and Australians and low in Asians (<25% in Chinese, Japanese and Koreans). N-acetylation and methylation pathways differ from other conjugation pathways in that they mask an amine with a nonionizable group so that the conjugates are less water soluble than the parent compound. However, certain N-acetlylations facilitate urinary excretion.<br>N-acetylation occurs in two sequential steps via a <i>ping-pong Bi-Bi mechanism</i>. In the first step, the acetyl group from acetyl-CoA is transferred to a cysteine residue in NAT, with consequent release of coenzyme-A. In the second step, the acetyl group is released from the acetylated NAT to the substrate, subsequently regenerating the enzyme.
R-HSA-264642	Acetylcholine Neurotransmitter Release Cycle	Acetylcholine neurotransmitter release cycle involves syntheis of choline, loading of clathrin scultpted synaptic vesicles, docking and priming of the acetyl choline loaded synaptic vesicles and then release of acetylcholine. This cycle occurs in neurons of central nervous system (CNS), peripheral, autonomic and somatic nervous system. In the CNS, the acetylcholine is released by the presynaptic neurons into the synaptic cleft where the released acetylcholine is accessible to acetylcholine receptors located on the postsynaptic neurons.
R-HSA-399997	Acetylcholine regulates insulin secretion	Acetylcholine released by parasympathetic nerve endings in the pancreas causes a potentiation of insulin release when glucose is present at concentrations greater than about 7 mM. Acetylcholine binds the Muscarinic Acetylcholine Receptor M3 on pancreatic beta cells. The binding has two effects: an increase in permeability of the cell to Na+ ions through an unknown mechanism, and the activation of Phospholipase C beta-1 through a heterotrimeric G protein, G(q).<br>After acetylcholine binds the Muscarinic Acetycholine Receptor M3, the receptor activates the G protein Gq by causing the alpha subunit of Gq to exchange GDP for GTP. Activation of Gq in turn activates Phospholipase C beta-1. Phospholipase C beta-1 hydrolyzes the phosphodiester bond at the third position of phosphoinositol 4,5-bisphosphate, producing diacylglycerols (DAG) and inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate.<br>DAG remains in the cell membrane and causes Protein Kinase C alpha (PKC alpha) to translocate from the cytosol to the membrane. This results in the activation of PKC alpha which then phosphorylates target proteins on serine and threonine residues. One known target of PKC alpha is Myristoylated Alanine-rich C Kinase Substrate (MARCKS), which is believed to affect vesicle transport and may be responsible for the increased traffic of insulin granules seen in response to acetylcholine.<br>Inositol trisphophate binds a receptor, the IP3 receptor, on calcium stores in the cell (probably the endoplasmic reticulum). The release of calcium into the cytosol stimulates the exocytosis of insulin granules.
R-HSA-1300645	Acrosome Reaction	The acrosome reaction is stimulated by zona pellucida binding and subsequent downstream events, including Ca2+ influx. Proacrosin cleavage is the hallmark event of the acrosome reaction.
R-HSA-2122948	Activated NOTCH1 Transmits Signal to the Nucleus	Mature NOTCH1 heterodimer on the cell surface is activated by one of its ligands: DLL1 (Cordle et al. 2008, Jarriault et al. 1998), DLL4 (Benedito et al. 2009), JAG1 (Li et al. 1998, Benedito et al. 2009) or JAG2 (Luo et al. 1997, Shimizu et al. 2000), expressed in trans on a neighboring cell. Thus, a ligand-expressing cell is a signal-sending cell, while the NOTCH1 expressing cell is a signal-receiving cell. If NOTCH1 has undergone Fringe modification in the Golgi, it is preferentially activated by Delta ligands (Yang et al. 2005), DLL1 and DLL4. <br><br><br>Upon binding to NOTCH1 on a neighboring cell, NOTCH ligands are ubiquitinated by Mindbomb (MIB1 and MIB2) and/or Neuralized (NEURL and NEURL1B) E3 ubiquitin ligases and endocytosed (Koo et al. 2007, Koo et al. 2005, Itoh et al. 2003, Lai et al. 2001, Koutelou et al. 2008, Song et al. 2006). Endocytosis of ubiquitinated ligands is thought to mechanically stretch the bound NOTCH1 receptor, exposing a cleavage site S2 that is recognized by ADAM10 and/or ADAM17 metalloprotease (van Tetering et al. 2009, Brou et al. 2000, Hartmann et al. 2002, Pan et al. 1997). S2 cleavage of NOTCH1 produces the NEXT1 fragment which is further cleaved at an S3 cleavage site by the gamma-secretase complex, resulting in release of the NOTCH1 intracellular domain (NICD1) into the cytosol (de Strooper et al. 1999, Schroeter et al. 1998, Huppert et al. 2000). NICD1 produced by activation of NOTCH1 in response to in trans presented Delta and Jagged ligands (DLL/JAG) traffics to the nucleus where it acts as a transcription regulator.<br><br><br>NOTCH1 signaling can also be activated by ligands other than DLL1, DLL4, JAG1 and JAG2. CNTN1 (Contactin-1), transiently expressed during central and peripheral nervous system development, activates NOTCH1 and NOTCH2 in trans, promoting oligodendrocyte maturation and myelination (Hu et al. 2003). DNER (Delta and Notch-like epidermal growth factor-related receptor) is a transmembrane protein specifically expressed in dendrites and cell bodies of postmitotic neurons. Activation of NOTCH1 by DNER in trans may play an important role in development of the central nervous system by influencing differentiation of astrocytes (Eiraku et al. 2005). Activation of NOTCH1 by both CNTN1 and DNER is Deltex (DTX)-dependent and results in gamma-secretase mediated release of NICD1. Three members of the Deltex protein family: DTX1, DTX2 and DTX4 possess a domain involved in binding cdc10/ankyrin repeats of NOTCH. DTX proteins are considered as positive regulators of NOTCH signaling, although the exact mechanism has not been elucidated (Matsuno et al. 1998, Kishi et al. 2001).In addition, DTX can mediate downregulation of NOTCH signaling by recruiting non-visual beta-arrestins to NOTCH (Mukherjee et al. 2005), thereby trigerring NOTCH ubiquitination. DTX proteins are negatively regulated by ITCH (AIP4) ubiquitin ligase (Chastagner et al. 2006).<br><br>NOTCH1 signaling in the signal-receiving cell can be turned off in cis by expression of NOTCH ligands DLL/JAG (Cordle et al. 2008, Sprinzak et al. 2010), as well as DLK1 (Baladron et al. 2005, Bray et al. 2008). Formation of NOTCH1:ligand complexes in cis prevents interaction of NOTCH1 with ligands expressed in trans, resulting in the inhibition of NOTCH signaling. In the signal-sending cell, NOTCH signaling can be negatively regulated by the protein NUMB, which is asymmetrically distributed during cell division (Rhyu et al. 1994). NUMB recruits ITCH ubiquitin ligase to NOTCH1 and promotes sorting of NOTCH1 through late endosomes for degradation (McGill et al. 2009, Chastagner et al. 2008). 
R-HSA-5625886	Activated PKN1 stimulates transcription of AR (androgen receptor) regulated genes KLK2 and KLK3	PKN1, activated by phosphorylation at threonine T774, binds activated AR (androgen receptor) and promotes transcription from AR-regulated promoters. On one hand, phosphorylated PKN1 promotes the formation of a functional complex of AR with the transcriptional coactivator NCOA2 (TIF2) (Metzger et al. 2003). On the other hand, binding of phosphorylated PKN1, in complex with the activated AR, to androgen-reponsive promoters of KLK2 and KLK3 (PSA) genes, leads to PKN1-mediated histone phosphorylation. PKN1-phosphorylated histones recruit histone demethylases KDM4C (JMJD2C) and KDM1A (LSD1), and the ensuing demethylation of histones associated with the promoter regions of KLK2 and KLK3 genes increases their transcription (Metzger et al. 2005, Metzger et al. 2008).
R-HSA-2033519	Activated point mutants of FGFR2	Autosomal dominant mutations in FGFR2 are associated with the development of a range of skeletal disorders including Beare-Stevensen cutis gyrata syndrome, Pfeiffer syndrome, Jackson-Weiss syndrome, Crouzon syndrome and Apert Syndrome (reveiwed in Burke, 1998; Webster and Donoghue 1997; Cunningham, 2007). Mutations that give rise to Crouzon, Jackson-Weiss and Pfeiffer syndromes tend to cluster in the third Ig-like domain of the receptor, either in exon IIIa (shared by the IIIb and the IIIc isoforms) or in the FGFR2c-specific exon IIIc. These mutations frequently involve creation or removal of a cysteine residue, leading to the formation of an unpaired cysteine residue that is thought to promote intramolecular dimerization and thus constitutive, ligand-independent activation (reviewed in Burke, 1998; Webster and Donoghue, 1997; Cunningham, 2007). Mutations in FGFR2 that give rise to Apert Syndrome cluster to the highly conserved Pro-Ser dipeptide in the IgII-Ig III linker; mutations in the paralogous residues of FGFR1 and 3 give rise to Pfeiffer and Muenke syndromes, respectively (Muenke, 1994; Wilkie, 1995; Bellus, 1996). Development of Beare-Stevensen cutis gyrata is associated with mutations in the transmembrane-proximal region of the receptor (Przylepa, 1996), and similar mutations in FGFR3 are linked to the development of thanatophoric dysplasia I (Tavormina, 1995a). These mutations all affect FGFR2 signaling without altering the intrinsic kinase activity of the receptor.<br><br><br>Activating point mutations have also been identified in FGFR2 in ~15% of endometrial cancers, as well as to a lesser extent in ovarian and gastric cancers (Dutt, 2008; Pollock, 2007; Byron, 2010; Jang, 2001). These mutations are found largely in the extracellular region and in the kinase domain of the receptor, and parallel activating mutations seen in autosomal dominant disorders described above.<br><br><br>Activating mutations in FGFR2 are thought to contribute to receptor activation through diverse mechanisms, including constitutive ligand-independent dimerization (Robertson, 1998), expanded range and affinity for ligand (Ibrahimi, 2004b; Yu, 2000) and enhanced kinase activity (Byron, 2008; Chen, 2007).
R-HSA-450302	activated TAK1 mediates p38 MAPK activation	p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) belongs to a highly conserved family of serine/threonine protein kinases. <p>The p38 MAPK-dependent signaling cascade is activated by pro-inflammatory or stressful stimuli such as ultraviolet radiation, oxidative injury, heat shock, cytokines, and other pro-inflammatory stimuli. p38 MAPK exists as four isoforms (alpha, beta, gamma, and delta). Of these, p38alpha and p38beta are ubiquitously expressed while p38gamma and p38delta are differentially expressed depending on tissue type. Each isoform is activated by upstream kinases including MAP kinase kinases (MKK) 3, 4, and 6, which in turn are phosphorylated by activated TAK1 at the typical Ser-Xaa-Ala-Xaa-Thr motif in their activation loops.<p>Once p38 MAPK is phosphorylated it activates numerous downstream substrates, including MAPK-activated protein kinase-2 and 3 (MAPKAPK-2 or 3) and mitogen and stress-activated kinase-1/2 (MSK1/2). MAPKAPK-2/3 and MSK1/2 function to phosphorylate heat shock protein 27 (HSP27) and cAMP-response element binding protein transcriptional factor, respectively. Other transcription factors, including activating transcription factor 2, Elk, CHOP/GADD153, and myocyte enhancer factor 2, are known to be regulated by these kinases. 
R-HSA-166054	Activated TLR4 signalling	TLR4 is unique among the TLR family in its ability to recruit four adapters to activate two distinct signaling pathways. One pathway is activated by the pair of the adapters Mal or TIRAP (Toll/interleukin-1-receptor (TIR)-domain-containing adapter protein) and MyD88, which leads to the NFkB activation and the induction of pro-inflammatory cytokines. The second pathway is activated by the adapters TRIF (TIR-domain-containing adapter protein inducing interferon-beta) and TRAM (TRIF-related adapter molecule). The combined use of TRIF and TRAM adapters is specific for TLR4 signaling pathway and leads to the induction of type I interferons and delayed activation of NFkB.<p>The previous model of TLR4 signaling pathway described the simultaneous activation of these two signaling pathways at the plasma membrane, however the later studies suggested that upon activation TLR4 first induces TIRAP-MyD88 signaling at the plasma membrane and is then endocytosed and activates TRAM-TRIF signaling from the early endosome [Kagan JC et al 2008; Tanimura N et al 2008; Zanoni I et al 2011].
R-HSA-111452	Activation and oligomerization of BAK protein	tBID binds to its mitochondrial partner BAK to release cytochrome c. Activated tBID results in an allosteric activation of BAK. This may induce its intramembranous oligomerization into a pore for cytochrome c efflux.
R-HSA-399710	Activation of AMPA receptors	AMPA receptors are functionally either Ca permeable or Ca impermeable based on the subunit composition. Ca permeability is determined by GluR2 subunit which undergoes post-transcriptional RNA editing that changes glutamine (Q) at the pore to arginine (R). Incorporation of even a single subunit in the AMPA receptor confers Ca-limiting properties. Ca permeable AMPA receptors permit Ca and Na whereas Ca impermeable AMPA receptors permit only Na. In general, glutamatergic neurons contain Ca impermeable AMPA receptors and GABAergic interneurons contain Ca permeable AMPA receptors. However, some synapses do contain a mixture of Ca permeable and Ca impermeable AMPA receptors. GluR1-4 are encoded by four genes however, alternative splicing generates several functional subunits namely long and short forms of GluR1 and GluR2. GluR4 has long tail only and GluR3 has short tail only. Besides the differences in the tail length, flip/flop isoforms are generated by an interchangeable exon that codes the fourth membranous domain towards the C terminus. The fip/flop isoforms determine rate of desensitization/resensitization and the rate of channel closing. Receptors homomers or heteromers assembled from the combination of GluR1-4 subunits that vary in C tail length and flip/flop versions generates a whole battery of functionally distinct AMPA receptors.
R-HSA-176814	Activation of APC/C and APC/C:Cdc20 mediated degradation of mitotic proteins	APC/C:Cdc20 is first activated at the prometaphase/metaphase transition through phosphorylation of core subunits of the APC/C by mitotic kinases as well as recruitment of the APC/C activator protein Cdc20. APC/C:Cdc20 promotes the multiubiquitination and ordered degradation of Cyclin A and Nek2 degradation in prometaphase followed by Cyclin B and securin in metaphase (Reviewed in Castro et al., 2005).
R-HSA-176187	Activation of ATR in response to replication stress	Genotoxic stress caused by DNA damage or stalled replication forks can lead to genomic instability. To guard against such instability, genotoxically-stressed cells activate checkpoint factors that halt or slow cell cycle progression. Among the pathways affected are DNA replication by reduction of replication origin firing, and mitosis by inhibiting activation of cyclin-dependent kinases (Cdks). A key factor involved in the response to stalled replication forks is the ATM- and rad3-related (ATR) kinase, a member of the phosphoinositide-3-kinase-related kinase (PIKK) family. Rather than responding to particular lesions in DNA, ATR and its binding partner ATRIP (ATR-interacting protein) sense replication fork stalling indirectly by associating with persistent ssDNA bound by RPA. These structures would be formed, for example, by dissociation of the replicative helicase from the leading or lagging strand DNA polymerase when the polymerase encounters a DNA lesion that blocks DNA synthesis. Along with phosphorylating the downstream transducer kinase Chk1 and the tumor suppressor p53, activated ATR modifies numerous factors that regulate cell cycle progression or the repair of DNA damage. The persistent ssDNA also stimulates recruitment of the RFC-like Rad17-Rfc2-5 alternative clamp-loading complex, which subsequently loads the Rad9-Hus1-Rad1 complex onto the DNA. The latter '9-1-1' complex serves to facilitate Chk1 binding to the stalled replication fork, where Chk1 is phosphorylated by ATR and thereby activated. Upon activation, Chk1 can phosphorylate additional substrates including the Cdc25 family of phosphatases (Cdc25A, Cdc25B, and Cdc25C). These enzymes catalyze the removal of inhibitory phosphate residues from cyclin-dependent kinases (Cdks), allowing their activation. In particular, Cdc25A primarily functions at the G1/S transition to dephosphorylate Cdk2 at Thr 14 and Tyr 15, thus positively regulating the Cdk2-cyclin E complex for S-phase entry. Cdc25A also has mitotic functions. Phosphorylation of Cdc25A at Ser125 by Chk1 leads to Cdc25A ubiquitination and degradation, thus inhibiting DNA replication origin firing. In contrast, Cdc25B and Cdc25C regulate the onset of mitosis through dephosphorylation and activation of Cdk1-cyclin B complexes. In response to replication stress, Chk1 phosphorylates Cdc25B and Cdc25C leading to Cdc25B/C complex formation with 14-3-3 proteins. As these complexes are sequestered in the cytoplasm, they are unable to activate the nuclear Cdk1-cyclin B complex for mitotic entry.<p>These events are outlined in the figure. Persistent single-stranded DNA associated with RPA binds claspin (A) and ATR:ATRIP (B), leading to claspin phosphorylation (C). In parallel, the same single-stranded DNA:RPA complex binds RAD17:RFC (D), enabling the loading of RAD9:HUS1:RAD1 (9-1-1) complex onto the DNA (E). The resulting complex of proteins can then repeatedly bind (F) and phosphorylate (G) CHK1, activating multiple copies of CHK1.
R-HSA-111447	Activation of BAD and translocation to mitochondria 	The switching on/off of its phosphorylation by growth/survival factors regulates BAD activity. BAD remains sequestered by 14-3-3 scaffold proteins after phosphorylation by Akt1. Calcineurin activates BAD by dephosphorylation.
R-HSA-114452	Activation of BH3-only proteins	The BH3-only members act as sentinels that selectively trigger apoptosis in response to developmental cues or stress-signals like DNA damages. Widely expressed mammalian BH3-only proteins are thought to act by binding to and neutralizing their pro-survival counterparts. Activation of BH3-only proteins directly or indirectly results in the activation of proapoptotic BAX and BAK to trigger cell death. Anti-apoptotic BCL-2 or BCL-XL may bind and sequester BH3-only molecules to prevent BAX, BAK activation. The individual BH3-only members are held in check by various mechanisms with in the cells. They are recruited for death duties in response to death cues by diverse activation processes.The mechanisms involved in activation and release of BH3-only proteins for apoptosis will be discussed in this section. <p>The following figure has been reproduced here with the kind permission from the authors.
R-HSA-111446	Activation of BIM and translocation to mitochondria 	BIM acts as a sentinel to check the integrity of the cytoskeleton. It exists as two variant proteins: BIM-EL and BIM-L. In healthy cells, these two isoforms are sequestered to the dynein motor complex on microtubules via the dynein light chain DLC1. JNK or MAPK8 releases BIM in response to UV irradiation by phosphorylation.
R-HSA-139910	Activation of BMF and translocation to mitochondria	In healthy cells, BMF is bound to the myosin V motor complex through its interaction with DLC2. UV irradiation or anoikis induces MAPK8 (JNK) to phosphorylate Dynein Light Chain 2 (DLC2) to release BMF.
R-HSA-174577	Activation of C3 and C5	The 3 pathways of complement activation converge on the cleavage of C3 by C3 convertases. C3 convertase cleaves C3 into C3a and C3b - a central step of complement activation. C3a remains in the fluid phase and acts as an anaphylatoxin, whereas C3b can form additional C3 convertases hastening the production of C3b. Besides, C3b binds to C3 convertases to form C5 convertase, which can act as an opsonin, or is degraded into fragments which cannot form an active convertase.
R-HSA-451308	Activation of Ca-permeable Kainate Receptor	Kainate receptors that are assembled with subunits GRIK1-5, are Ca2+ permeable if GRIK1 and GRIK2 are not edited at the Q/R or other sites.<br>These channels permit Ca2+ upon activation by glutamate or other agonists.
R-HSA-442745	Activation of CaMK IV	CaMKIV is activated in a multi-step mechanism in an Ca2+/Calmodulin dependent manner.
R-HSA-111459	Activation of caspases through apoptosome-mediated cleavage	Procaspase-3 and 7 are cleaved by the apoptosome.
R-HSA-211227	Activation of DNA fragmentation factor	 DNA fragmentation in response to apoptotic signals is achieved, in part, through the activity of apoptotic nucleases, termed DNA fragmentation factor (DFF) or caspase-activated DNase (CAD) (reviewed in Widlak and Garrard, 2005). In non-apoptotic cells, DFF is a nuclear heterodimer consisting of a 45 kD chaperone and inhibitor subunit (DFF45)/inhibitor of CAD (ICAD-L)] and a 40 kD nuclease subunit (DFF40/CAD)( Liu et al. 1997, 1998; Enari et al. 1998). During apoptosis, activated caspase-3 or -7 cleave DFF45/ICAD releasing active DFF40/CAD nuclease. The activity of DFF is tightly controlled at multiple stages. During translation, DFF45/ICAD, Hsp70, and Hsp40 proteins play a role in insuring the appropriate folding of DFF40 during translation(Sakahira and Nagata, 2002). The nuclease activity of DFF40 is enhanced by the chromosomal proteins histone H1, Topoisomerase II and HMGB1/2(Widlak et al., 2000). In addition, the inhibitors (DFF45/35; ICAD-S/L) are produced in stoichiometric excess (Widlak et al., 2003).
R-HSA-1296041	Activation of G protein gated Potassium channels	Activation of Kir 3 channels occurs after binding of G beta gamma subunits of GPCR. Activation of Kir3/GIRK leads to K+ efflux. The dissociation of GPCR into G alpha and G beta gamma subunits is activated by the activation of GABA B receptor by GABA binding.
R-HSA-991365	Activation of GABAB receptors	GABA B receptors are metabotropic receptors that are functionally linked to C type G protein coupled receptors.? GABA B receptors are activated upon ligand binding. The GABA B1 subunit binds ligand and GABA B2 subunit modulates the activity of adenylate cyclase via the intracellular loop.? GABA B receptors show inhibitory activity via Galpha/G0 subunits via the inhibition of adenylate cyclase or via the activity of Gbeta/gamma subunits that mediate the inhibition of voltage gated Ca2+ channels.
R-HSA-2426168	Activation of gene expression by SREBF (SREBP)	After transiting to the nucleus SREBPs (SREBP1A/1C/2, SREBFs) bind short sequences, sterol regulatory elements (SREs), in the promoters of target genes (reviewed in Eberle et al. 2004, Weber et al. 2004). SREBPs alone are relatively weak activators of transcription, with SREBP1C being significantly weaker than SREBP1A or SREBP2. In combination with other transcription factors such as SP1 and NF-Y the SREBPs are much stronger activators. SREBP1C seems to more specifically target genes involved in fatty acid synthesis while SREBP2 seems to target genes involved in cholesterol synthesis (Pai et al. 1998).
R-HSA-936964	Activation of IRF3/IRF7 mediated by TBK1/IKK epsilon	Cell stimulation with viral ds RNA leads to the activation of two IKK-related serine/threonine kinases, TBK1 and IKK-i which directly phosphorylate IRF3 and IRF7 promoting their dimerization and translocation into the nucleus. Although both kinases show structural and functional similarities, it seems that TBK1 and IKK-i differ in their regulation of downstream signaling events of TLR3.<p>IRF3 activation and IFN-b production by poly(I:C) are decreased in TBK1-deficient mouse fibroblasts, whereas normal activation was observed in the IKK-i-deficient fibroblasts. However, in double-deficient mouse fibroblasts, the activation of IRF3 is completely abolished, suggesting a partially redundant functions of TBK1 and IKK-i [Hemmi et al 2004].<p>TLR3 recruits and activates PI3 kinase (PI3K), which activates the downstream kinase, Akt, leading to full phosphorylation and activation of IRF-3 [Sarkar SN et al 2004]. When PI3K is not recruited to TLR3 or its activity is blocked, IRF-3 is only partially phosphorylated and fails to bind the promoter of the target gene.
R-HSA-451326	Activation of Kainate Receptors upon glutamate binding	Kainate receptors are found both in the presynaptc terminals and the postsynaptic neurons. <br>Kainate receptor activation could lead to either ionotropic activity (influx of Ca2+ or Na+ and K+) in the postsynaptic neuron or coupling of the receptor with G proteins in the presynaptic and the postsynaptic neurons. <br>Kainate receptors are tetramers made from subunits GRIK1-5 or GluR5-7 and KA1-2. Activation of kainate receptors made from GRIK1 or KA2 release Ca2+ from the intracellular stores in a G protein-dependent manner. The G protein involved in this process is sensitive to pertussis toxin.
R-HSA-1592389	Activation of Matrix Metalloproteinases	The matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs), previously known as matrixins, are classically known to be involved in the turnover of extracellular matrix (ECM) components. However, recent high throughput proteomics analyses have revealed that ~80% of MMP substrates are non-ECM proteins including cytokines, growth factor binding protiens, and receptors. It is now clear that MMPs regulate ECM turnover not only by cleaving ECM components, but also by the regulation of cell signalling, and that some MMPs are beneficial and may be drug anti-targets. Thus, MMPs have important roles in many processes including embryo development, morphogenesis, tissue homeostasis and remodeling. They are implicated in several diseases such as arthritis, periodontitis, glomerulonephritis, atherosclerosis, tissue ulceration, and cancer cell invasion and metastasis. All MMPs are synthesized as preproenzymes. Alternate splice forms are known, leading to nuclear localization of select MMPs. Most are secreted from the cell, or in the case of membrane type (MT) MMPs become plasma membrane associated, as inactive proenzymes. Their subsequent activation is a key regulatory step, with requirements specific to MMP subtype.
R-HSA-451307	Activation of Na-permeable Kainate Receptors	Kainate receptors that are formed by subunits GRIK1 and or GRIK2 that are edited at the Q/R and other editing sites in GRIK2 are Ca2+ impermeable. They permit the passage of Na+ ions. Glutamine in GRIK1 at position 636 is replaced by arginine by an editing step which occurs posttranscriptioanlly. GRIK2 is glutamine 621 is edited to arginine. GRIK2 is also edited at 571 (Y/C) where a tyrosine residue is changed to cysteine and 567 (I/V) where an isoleucine is changed to valine. All three sites are edited postranscriptionally. A fully edited GRIK2 at all three sites is impermeable to calcium ions.
R-HSA-1169091	Activation of NF-kappaB in B cells	DAG and calcium activate protein kinase C beta (PKC-beta, Kochs et al. 1991) which phosphorylates CARMA1 and other proteins (Sommer et al. 2005). Phosphorylated CARMA1 recruits BCL10 and MALT1 to form the CBM complex (Sommer et al. 2005, Tanner et al. 2007) which, in turn, recruits the kinase TAK1 and the IKK complex (Sommer et al. 2005, Shinohara et al. 2005 using chicken cells). TAK1 phosphorylates the IKK-beta subunit, activating it (Wang et al. 2001). The IKK complex then phosphorylates IkB complexed with NF-kappaB dimers in the cytosol (Zandi et al. 1998, Burke et al. 1999, Heilker et al. 1999), resulting in the degradation of IkB (Miyamoto et al. 1994, Traenckner et al. 1994, Alkalay et al. 1995, DiDonato et al. 1995, Li et al. 1995, Lin et al. 1995, Scherer et al. 1995, Chen et al. 1995). NF-kappaB dimers are thereby released and are translocated to the nucleus where they activate transcription (Baeuerle and Baltimore 1988, Blank et al. 1991, Ghosh et al. 2008, Fagerlund et al. 2008).
R-HSA-629602	Activation of Nicotinic Acetylcholine Receptors	Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors (nAchR) are a subtype of acetylcholine receptors that are activated by nicotine and allow the influx of monovalent (sodium) and divalent cations(calcium), however, the permeability of sodium and/or calcium maybe high or low depending on the subunit composition of the receptor. Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors are expressed widely in the central and peripheral nervous system in the presynaptic terminal, terminal bouton and post-synaptic neuron. Functionally nicotinic acetylcholine receptors in the pre-synaptic and postsynaptic terminals behave similarly. Nicotinic AChR are a family of acetylcholine gated pentameric receptors that are formed by the association of various combinations of mostly alpha, beta subunits and sometimes gamma delta, episilon subunits. In addition, receptors may be more diverse due the fact that some receptor have same subunits but the stoichiometry of the subunits is different. 
R-HSA-2980767	Activation of NIMA Kinases NEK9, NEK6, NEK7	NEK6 and NEK7 are activated during mitosis by another NIMA family kinase, NEK9 (Belham et al. 2003, Richards et al. 2009), which is activated by CDK1- and PLK1-mediated phosphorylation (Roig et al. 2002, Bertran et al. 2011). 
R-HSA-442755	Activation of NMDA receptor upon glutamate binding and postsynaptic events	NMDA receptors are a subtype of ionotropic glutamate receptors that are specifically activated by a glutamate agonist N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA). Activation of NMDA receptor involves opening of the ion channel that allows the influx of Ca2+. NMDA receptors are central to activity dependent changes in synaptic strength and are predominantly involved in the synaptic plasticity that pertain to learning and memory. A unique feature of NMDA receptor unlike other glutamate receptors is the requirement of dual activation of the NMDA receptor, which require both voltage dependent and ligand dependent activation. At resting membrane potential the NMDA receptors are blocked by Mg2+. The voltage dependent Mg2+ block is relieved upon depolarization of the post-synpatic membrane . The ligand dependent activation of the NMDA receptor requires co-activation by two ligands, namely glutamate and glycine. NMDA receptors are coincidence detector, and are activated only if there is simultaneous activation of both pre and post-synaptic cell. Upon activation NMDA receptors allow the influx of Ca2+ that initiates various molecular signaling cascades that are involved in the process of learning and memory.
R-HSA-111448	Activation of NOXA and translocation to mitochondria	NOXA is transactivated in a p53-dependent manner and by E2F1. Activated NOXA is translocated to mitochondria.
R-HSA-2151209	Activation of PPARGC1A (PGC-1alpha) by phosphorylation	The transcriptional coactivator PPARGC1A (PGC-1alpha), one of the master regulators of mitochondrial biogenesis, is activated by phosphorylation. Energy depletion causes a reduction in ATP and an increase in AMP which activates AMPK. AMPK in turn phosphorylates PPARGC1A. Likewise, p38 MAPK is activated by muscle contraction (possibly via calcium and CaMKII) and phosphorylates PPARGC1A. PPARGC1A does not bind DNA directly, but rather interacts with other transcription factors. Deacetylation of PPARGC1A by SIRT1 appears to follow phosphorylation however the role of deacetylation is unresolved (Canto et al. 2009, Gurd et al. 2011, Philp et al. 2011)
R-HSA-139915	Activation of PUMA and translocation to mitochondria	Puma is transactivated in a p53-dependent manner and by E2F1. Activated Puma is translocated to mitochondria.
R-HSA-428540	Activation of Rac	A low level of Rac activity is essential to maintain axon outgrowth and Robo activation recruits Sos, a dual specificity GEF to the plasma membrane via Dock to activate Rac during midline repulsion.
R-HSA-1169092	Activation of RAS in B cells	RasGRP1 and RasGRP3 bind diacylglycerol at the plasma membrane (Lorenzo et al. 2001) and are phosphorylated by protein kinase C (Teixeira et al. 2003, Zheng et al. 2005). Phosphorylated RasGRP1 (Roose et al. 2007) and RasGRP3 (Ohba et al. 2000, Yamashita et al. 2000, Rebhun et al. 2000, Lorenzo et al. 2001) then catalyze the exchange of GDP for GTP bound by RAS, thereby activating RAS.
R-HSA-5635838	Activation of SMO	Activation of the transmembrane protein SMO in response to Hh stimulation is a major control point in the Hh signaling pathway (reviewed in Ayers and Therond, 2010; Jiang and Hui, 2008). In the absence of ligand, SMO is inhibited in an unknown manner by the Hh receptor PTCH. PTCH regulates SMO in a non-stoichiometric manner and there is little evidence that endogenous PTCH and SMO interact directly (Taipale et al, 2002; reviewed in Huangfu and Anderson, 2006). PTCH may regulate SMO activity by controlling the flux of sterol-related SMO agonists and/or antagonists, although this has not been fully substantiated (Khaliullina et al, 2009; reviewed in Rohatgi and Scott, 2007; Briscoe and Therond, 2013).<br><br>PTCH-mediated inhibition of SMO is relieved upon ligand stimulation of PTCH, but the mechanisms for this relief are again unknown. SMO and PTCH appear to have opposing localizations in both the 'off' and 'on' state, with PTCH exiting and SMO entering the cilium upon Hh pathway activation (Denef et al, 2000; Rohatgi et al, 2007; reviewed in Goetz and Anderson, 2010; Hui and Angers, 2011). Activation of SMO involves a conserved phosphorylation-mediated conformational change in the C-terminal tails that destabilizes an intramolecular interaction and promotes the interaction between adjacent tails in the SMO dimer. In Drosophila, this phosphorylation is mediated by PKA and CK1, while in vertebrates it appears to involve ADRBK1/GRK2 and CSNK1A1. Sequential phosphorylations along multiple serine and threonine motifs in the SMO C-terminal tail appear to allow a graded response to Hh ligand concentration in both flies and vertebrates (Zhao et al, 2007; Chen et al, 2010; Chen et al, 2011). In flies, Smo C-terminal tail phosphorylation promotes an association with the Hedgehog signaling complex (HSC) through interaction with the scaffolding kinesin-2 like protein Cos2, activating the Fu kinase and ultimately releasing uncleaved Ci from the complex (Zhang et al, 2005; Ogden et al, 2003; Lum et al, 2003; reviewed in Mukhopadhyay and Rohatgi, 2014). In vertebrates, SMO C-terminal tail phosphorylation and conformational change is linked to its KIF7-dependent ciliary accumulation (Chen et al, 2011; Zhao et al, 2007; Chen et al, 2010). In the cilium, SMO is restricted to a transition-zone proximal region known as the EvC zone (Yang et al, 2012; Blair et al, 2011; Pusapati et al, 2014; reviewed in Eggenschwiler 2012). Both SMO phosphorylation and its ciliary localization are required to promote the Hh-dependent dissociation of the GLI:SUFU complex, ultimately allowing full-length GLI transcription factors to translocate to the nucleus to activate Hh-responsive genes (reviewed in Briscoe and Therond, 2013).<br><br><br>
R-HSA-450341	Activation of the AP-1 family of transcription factors	Activator protein-1 (AP-1) is a collective term referring to a group of transcription factors that bind to promoters of target genes in a sequence-specific manner. AP-1 family consists of hetero- and homodimers of bZIP (basic region leucine zipper) proteins, mainly of Jun-Jun, Jun-Fos or Jun-ATF. <p>AP-1 members are involved in the regulation of a number of cellular processes including cell growth, proliferation, survival, apoptosis, differentiation, cell migration. The ability of a single transcription factor to determine a cell fate critically depends on the relative abundance of AP-1 subunits, the composition of AP-1 dimers, the quality of stimulus, the cell type, the co-factor assembly. </p><p>AP-1 activity is regulated on multiple levels; transcriptional, translational and post-translational control mechanisms contribute to the balanced production of AP-1 proteins and their functions. Briefly, regulation occurs through:<ol><li>effects on jun, fos, atf gene transcription and mRNA turnover.<li> AP-1 protein members turnover. <li>post-translational modifications of AP-1 proteins that modulate their transactivation potential (effect of protein kinases or phosphatases).<li>interactions with other transcription factors that can either induce or interfere with AP-1 activity.</ol>
R-HSA-72662	Activation of the mRNA upon binding of the cap-binding complex and eIFs, and subsequent binding to 43S	The cap-binding complex is constituted by the initiation factors eIF4A, eIF4G and eIF4E. First, eIF4E must be released from the inactive eIF4E:4E-BP complex. Then eIF4A interacts with eIF4G, and eIF4E binds to the amino-terminal domain of eIF4G, resulting in the formation of the cap-binding complex eIF4F. eIF4A together with eIF4B or eIF4H is thought to unwind RNA secondary structures near the 5'-end of the mRNA. The translation initiation complex is formed when the 43S complex binds the cap-bound mRNA.
R-HSA-2485179	Activation of the phototransduction cascade	The photoreceptor cascade starts with light isomerization of 11-cis-retinal (11cRAL) of rhodopsin (RHO) to all-trans-retinal (atRAL), inducing a conformational change in RHO to the active, metarhodopsin II (MII) state. MII activates the G protein transducin (Gt) that in turn activates phosphodiesterase 6 (PDE6). Consequently, there is a fall in the intracellular concentration of cGMP that closes cGMP-dependent cation channels (CNG channels) and hyperpolarizes the rod. This has the effect of reducing or stopping glutamate release from synaptic vesicles thus signalling to the surrounding cells how many photons were absorbed (Burns & Pugh 2010, Korenbrot 2012, Pugh & Lamb 1993).
R-HSA-68962	Activation of the pre-replicative complex	In S. cerevisiae, two ORC subunits, Orc1 and Orc5, both bind ATP, and Orc1 in addition has ATPase activity. Both ATP binding and ATP hydrolysis appear to be essential functions in vivo. ATP binding by Orc1 is unaffected by the association of ORC with origin DNA (ARS) sequences, but ATP hydrolysis is ARS-dependent, being suppressed by associated double-stranded DNA and stimulated by associated single-stranded DNA. These data are consistent with the hypothesis that ORC functions as an ATPase switch, hydrolyzing bound ATP and changing state as DNA unwinds at the origin immediately before replication. It is attractive to speculate that ORC likewise functions as a switch as human pre-replicative complexes are activated, but human Orc proteins are not well enough characterized to allow the model to be critically tested. mRNAs encoding human orthologs of all six Orc proteins have been cloned, and ATP-binding amino acid sequence motifs have been identified in Orc1, Orc4, and Orc5. Interactions among proteins expressed from the cloned genes have been characterized, but the ATP-binding and hydrolyzing properties of these proteins and complexes of them have not been determined.
R-HSA-187015	Activation of TRKA receptors	Trk receptors can either be activated by neurotrophins or by two G-protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) although the biological relevance of GPCRs remains to be shown.
R-HSA-75108	Activation, myristolyation of BID and translocation to mitochondria	BID may promote cell death by activating BAX and BAK while inactivating anti-apoptotic proteins. The engagement of cell surface receptors activates the caspase-8, a heterodimer, that cleaves BID in its amino terminal region. This particular event may act as a link between Extrinsic (caspase 8/10 dependent) and Intrinsic (Bcl-2 inhibitable) pathways although some evidences from mouse genetic experiments suggest the contrary. It has been suggested that the death signals from the extrinsic or death receptor pathway may get amplified by the mechanisms of intrinsic pathway and that this functional loop may be enabled by the molecules like tBID (truncated BID).<BR> Cleavage of BID to tBID can also be achieved by Granzyme B. The truncated protein is myristoylated and translocates to mitochondria.
R-HSA-114294	Activation, translocation and oligomerization of BAX	As a result of binding to Bid, Bax oligomerizes and integrates in the outer mitochondrial membrane, triggering cytochrome c release. Bax mitochondrial membrane insertion triggered by Bid may represent a key step in pathways leading to apoptosis (Eskes et al., 2000).
R-HSA-1482798	Acyl chain remodeling of CL	Acyl chain remodeling of cardiolipin (CL) occurs in the inner mitochondria membranes (IM) via hydrolysis by phopholipases and subsequent reacylation by acyltransferases. At the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) membrane the situation is more complicated with monolysocardiolipin (MLCL) involved in hydrolysis and subsequent reacylation back to CL (Zachman et al. 2010, Malhotra et al. 2009, Xu et al. 2003, Taylor & Hatch 2009, Cao et al. 2004, Zhao et al. 2009, Buckland et al. 1998).
R-HSA-1482883	Acyl chain remodeling of DAG and TAG	Acyl chain remodeling of triacylglycerol (TAG) and diacylglycerol (DAG) progresses through their hydrolysis by patatin-like phospholipase domain-containing proteins 2/3 (PNPLA2/3). DAG is reacylated back to TAG by acylglycerol O-acyltransferase 1/2 (DGAT1/2), while DAG and its hydrolysis product 2-monoacylglycerol (2-MAG) are transacylated back to TAG by PNPLA2/3. In addition, the DAG hydrolysis product 2-MAG is subsequently hydrolyzed to fatty acid and glycerol by monoglyceride lipase (MGLL) (Jenkins et al. 2004).
R-HSA-1482788	Acyl chain remodelling of PC	In the acyl chain remodelling pathway (Lands cycle), phosphatidylcholine (PC) is hydrolysed by phopholipases and subsequently reacylated by acyltransferases. These cycles modify the fatty acid composition of glycerophospholipids to generate diverse molecules asymmetrically distributed in the cell membrane (Ghomashchi et al. 2010, Singer et al. 2002, Cao et al. 2008, Zhao et al. 2008).
R-HSA-1482839	Acyl chain remodelling of PE	In the acyl chain remodelling pathway (Lands cycle), phosphatidylethanolamine (PE) is hydrolyzed by phopholipases and subsequently reacylated by acyltransferases. These cycles modify the fatty acid composition of glycerophospholipids to generate diverse molecules asymmetrically distributed in the cell membrane (Ghomashchi et al. 2010, Singer et al. 2002, Cao et al. 2008, Zhao et al. 2008, Hishikawa et al. 2008).
R-HSA-1482925	Acyl chain remodelling of PG	In the acyl chain remodelling pathway (Lands cycle), phosphatidylglycerol (PG) is hydrolyzed by phopholipases and subsequently reacylated by acyltransferases. These cycles modify the fatty acid composition of glycerophospholipids to generate diverse molecules asymmetrically distributed in the cell membrane. The events occur additionally in the inner mitochondria membranes (IM) as well as in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) membrane (Ghomashchi et al. 2010, Singer et al. 2002, Cao et al. 2008, Yang et al. 2004, Nie et al. 2010).
R-HSA-1482922	Acyl chain remodelling of PI	In the acyl chain remodelling pathway (Lands cycle), phosphatidylinositol (PI) is hydrolyzed by phospholipases and subsequently reacylated by acyltransferases. These cycles modify the fatty acid composition of glycerophospholipids to generate diverse molecules asymmetrically distributed in the cell membrane (Ghomashchi et al. 2010, Singer et al. 2002, Gijon et al. 2008, Lee et al. 2008).
R-HSA-1482801	Acyl chain remodelling of PS	In the acyl chain remodelling pathway (Lands cycle), phosphatidylserine (PS) is hydrolysed by phopholipases and subsequently reacylated by acyltransferases. These cycles modify the fatty acid composition of glycerophospholipids to generate diverse molecules asymmetrically distributed in the cell membrane (Ghomashchi et al. 2010, Singer et al. 2002, Cao et al. 2008; Hishikawa et al. 2008).
R-HSA-1280218	Adaptive Immune System	Adaptive immunity refers to antigen-specific immune response efficiently involved in clearing the pathogens. The adaptive immune system is comprised of B and T lymphocytes that express receptors with remarkable diversity tailored to recognize aspects of particular pathogens or antigens. During infection, dendritic cells (DC) which act as sentinels in the peripheral tissues recognize and pick up the pathogen in the form of antigenic determinants and then process these antigens and present them to T cells. These T cells of appropriate specificity respond to the antigen, and either kill the pathogen directly or secrete cytokines that will stimulate B lymphocyte response. B cells provide humoral immunity by secreting antibodies specific for the pathogen or antigen.
R-HSA-417973	Adenosine P1 receptors	The adenosine receptors (P1 receptors) are a class of purinergic receptors, G-protein coupled receptors with adenosine as their endogenous ligand.In humans, there are four adenosine receptors. Each is encoded by a separate gene and the four receptors have distinct, though overlapping, functions. For instance, both A1 and A2A receptors play roles in the heart, regulating myocardial oxygen consumption and coronary blood flow. They also have important roles in the brain, regulating the release of other neurotransmitters such as dopamine and glutamate. The A2B and A3 receptors are located peripherally and are involved in processes such as inflammation and immune responses. Fredholm BB et al, 2001).
R-HSA-170660	Adenylate cyclase activating pathway	Stimulatory G proteins activate adenylate cyclase, which drives the conversion of cAMP from ATP and in turn activates cAMP-dependent protein kinase and subsequent kinase pathways.
R-HSA-170670	Adenylate cyclase inhibitory pathway	Guanine nucleotide-binding protein G(i) alpha (Gi-alpha) inhibits adenylate cyclase, thus inhibiting the production of cAMP from ATP and ultimately decreasing the activity of cAMP-dependent protein kinase.
R-HSA-418990	Adherens junctions interactions	The adherens junctions (AJ) are multiprotein complexes that promote homotypic cell adhesion in nearly all types of tissue by linking membrane and cytoskeletal components at discrete contact regions (reviewed in Hartsock & Nelson 2008; Gumbiner 2005; Ebnet, 2008). The molecular constituents of adherens junctions form adhesive units which are organized into higher order junctional adhesions that create a zipper-like seal between adjacent cells. Junctional adhesions function in epithelial cell polarization and in the coupling of cytoskeletons in adjacent cells that allow coordinated movements. During embryonic development, AJs function in specifying adhesion between cells and contribute in the sorting of different cell types. AJs also regulate cell polarity and shape, promote cell-cell communication and help mediate contact inhibition of cell growth. This module covers transdimerization events involving AJ transmembrane proteins (cadherins and nectins) (Gumbiner 2005; Ebnet 2008; Hartsock & Nelson 2008).
R-HSA-418592	ADP signalling through P2Y purinoceptor 1	Co-activation of P2Y1 and P2Y12 is necessary for complete platelet activation. P2Y1 is coupled to Gq and helps trigger the release of calcium from internal stores, leading to weak and reversible platelet aggregation. P2Y12 is Gi coupled, inhibiting adenylate cyclase, leading to decreased cAMP, a consequent decrease in cAMP-dependent protein kinase activity which increases cytoplasmic [Ca2+], necessary for activation (Woulfe et al. 2001).<br> In activated platelets, P2Y12 signaling is required for the amplification of aggregation induced by all platelet agonists including collagen, thrombin, thromboxane, adrenaline and serotonin. P2Y12 activation causes potentiation of thromboxane generation, secretion leading to irreversible platelet aggregation and thrombus stabilization. 
R-HSA-392170	ADP signalling through P2Y purinoceptor 12	Co-activation of P2Y1 and P2Y12 is necessary for complete platelet activation. P2Y1 is coupled to Gq and helps trigger the release of calcium from internal stores, leading to weak and reversible platelet aggregation. P2Y12 is Gi coupled, inhibiting adenylate cyclase, leading to decreased cAMP, a consequent decrease in cAMP-dependent protein kinase activity which increases cytoplasmic [Ca2+], necessary for activation (Woulfe et al. 2001).<br> In activated platelets, P2Y12 signaling is required for the amplification of aggregation induced by all platelet agonists including collagen, thrombin, thromboxane, adrenaline and serotonin. P2Y12 activation causes potentiation of thromboxane generation, secretion leading to irreversible platelet aggregation and thrombus stabilization. 
R-HSA-392023	Adrenaline signalling through Alpha-2 adrenergic receptor	Adrenaline (epinephrine) signalling via the alpha-2 adrenergic receptor has many effects including inhibition of insulin release in pancreas, iinduction of glucagon release from pancreas, contraction of sphincters of the gastrointestinal tract, negative feedback processes in neuronal synapses and stimulation of platelet aggregation. This receptor preferentially couples to members of the Gi class of heterotrimeric G-proteins, leading to inhibition af adenylate cyclase and thereby decreased cAMP levels. 
R-HSA-400042	Adrenaline,noradrenaline inhibits insulin secretion	The catecholamines adrenaline (epinephrine) and noradrenaline (norepinephrine) inhibit insulin secretion from pancreatic beta cells. Four effects are seen in the cells:<br>1. Inhibition of exocytosis of secretory granules, the major effect.<br>2. Opening of ATP-sensitive potassium channels (KATP channels) and repolarization of the cell.<br>3. Closing of L-type voltage-dependent calcium channels and inhibition of calcium influx.<br>4. Inhibition of adenylyl cyclase activity.<br>The first event in adrenaline/noradrenaline signaling in beta cells is the binding of adrenaline or noradrenaline to alpha-2 adrenergic receptors, which are G-protein coupled receptors. Binding activates the alpha subunits in heterotrimeric Gi and Go complexes to exchange GDP for GTP, forming the active G alpha:GTP complex. Experiments using specific antibodies against the alpha subunits in mice show that Gi alpha-1, Gi alpha-2, and Go alpha-2 are responsible for adrenergic effects. The exact beta and gamma subunits of the heterotrimeric G-proteins are unknown.<br>After activation by GTP, the heterotrimeric complex dissociates into the G alpha:GTP complex and the beta:gamma complex. The G alpha:GTP complex causes the inhibition of exocytosis by an unknown mechanism that involves protein acylation. This is responsible for most of the observed inhibition of insulin secretion. Additionally, the G alpha:GTP complex activates (opens) KATP channels, allowing the cell to repolarize. The beta:gamma complex inhibits (closes) voltage-dependent calcium channels, reducing the intracellular calcium concentration, and inhibits adenylyl cyclase, reducing the intracellular cAMP concentration.
R-HSA-390696	Adrenoceptors	The adrenoceptors (adrenergic receptors) are targets for the catecholamines adrenaline (epinephrine) and noradrenaline (norepinephrine). These receptors are widespread in the body and binding of catecholamines produces a sympathetic response ('flight-or-fight response') resulting in increased heart rate, pupil dilation and energy mobilization amongst other responses. There are three major types of adrenoceptor, alpha1, alpha2 and beta. Each type is thought to have three subtypes; alpha1 (1A,1B,1D), alpha2 (2A,2B,2C) and beta (1,2,3) (Bylund DB et al, 1994).
R-HSA-879415	Advanced glycosylation endproduct receptor signaling	Advanced Glycosylation End- product-specific Receptor (AGER) also known as Receptor for Advanced Glycation End-products (RAGE) is a multi-ligand membrane receptor belonging to the immunoglobulin superfamily. It is considered to be a Pattern Recognition Receptor (Liliensiek et al. 2004). It recognizes a large variety of modified proteins known as advanced glycation/glycosylation endproducts (AGEs), a heterogenous group of structures that are generated by the Maillard reaction, a consequence of long-term incubation of proteins with glucose (Ikeda et al. 1996). Their accumulation is associated with diabetes, atherosclerosis, renal failure and ageing (Schmidt et al. 1999). The most prevalent class of AGE in vivo are N(6)-carboxymethyllysine (NECML) adducts (Kislinger et al. 1991). In addition to AGEs, AGER is a signal transduction receptor for amyloid-beta peptide (Ab) (Yan et al. 1996), mediating Ab neurotoxicity and promoting Ab influx into the brain. AGER also responds to the proinflammatory S100/calgranulins (Hofmann et al. 1999) and High mobility group protein B1 (HMGB1/Amphoterin/DEF), a protein linked to neurite outgrowth and cellular motility (Hori et al. 1995).<br><br>The major inflammatory pathway stimulated by AGER activation is NFkappaB. Though the signaling cascade is unclear, several pieces of experimental data suggest that activation of AGER leads to sustained activation and upregulation of NFkappaB, measured as NFkappaB translocation to the nucleus, and increased levels of de novo synthesized NFkappaB (Bierhaus et al. 2001). As this is clearly an indirect effect it is represented here as positive regulation of NFkappaB translocation to the nucleus. AGER can bind ERK1/2 and thereby activate the MAPK and JNK cascades (Bierhaus et al. 2005).
R-HSA-5423646	Aflatoxin activation and detoxification	Aflatoxins are among the principal mycotoxins produced as secondary metabolites by the molds Aspergillus flavus and Aspergillus parasiticus that contaminate economically important food and feed crops (Wild & Turner 2002). Aflatoxin B1 (AFB1) is the most potent naturally occurring carcinogen known and is also an immunosuppressant. It is a potent hepatocarcinogenic agent in many species, and has been implicated in the etiology of human hepatocellular carcinoma. Poultry, especially turkeys, are extremely sensitive to the toxic and carcinogenic action of AFB1 present in animal feed, resulting in multi-million dollar losses to the industry. Discerning the biochemical and molecular mechanisms of this extreme sensitivity of poultry to AFB1 will help with the development of new strategies to increase aflatoxin resistance (Rawal et al. 2010, Diaz & Murcia 2011).<br><br><br>AFB1 has one major genotoxic metabolic fate, conversion to AFXBO, and several others that are less mutagenic but that can still be quite toxic. AFB1 can be oxidised to the toxic AFB1 exo 8,9 epoxide (AFXBO) product by several cytochrome P450 enzymes, especially P450 3A4 in the liver. This 8,9 epoxide can react with the N7 atom of a guanyl base of DNA to produce adducts by intercalating between DNA base pairs. The exo epoxide is unstable in solution, however, and can react spontaneously to form a diol that is no longer reactive with DNA. The diol product in turn undergoes base-catalysed rearrangement to a dialdehyde that can react with protein lysine residues. AFB1 can also be metabolised to products (AFQ1, AFM1, AFM1E) which have far less genotoxic consequences than AFB1. The main route of detoxification of AFB1 is conjugation of its reactive 8,9-epoxide form with glutathione (GSH). This reaction is carried out by trimeric glutathione transferases (GSTs), providing a chemoprotective mechanism against toxicity. Glutathione conjugates are usually excreted as mercapturic acids in urine (Guengerich et al. 1998, Hamid et al. 2013). The main metabolic routes of aflatoxin in humans are described here.
R-HSA-351143	Agmatine biosynthesis	Agmatine is an amine that is formed by decarboxylation of L-arginine by the enzyme arginine decarboxylase (ADC) and hydrolyzed by the enzyme agmatinase to putrescine. Agmatine binds to several target receptors in the brain and has been proposed as a novel neuromodulator (Reghunathan 2006). Agmatine has the potential to serve in the coordination of the early and repair phase pathways of arginine in inflammation (Satriano, 2003).
R-HSA-198323	AKT phosphorylates targets in the cytosol	Following activation, AKT can phosphorylate an array of target proteins in the cytoplasm, many of which are involved in cell survival control. Phosphorylation of TSC2 feeds positively to the TOR kinase, which, in turn, contributes to AKT activation (positive feedback loop).
R-HSA-198693	AKT phosphorylates targets in the nucleus	After translocation into the nucleus, AKT can phosphorylate a number of targets there such as CREB, forkhead transcription factors, SRK and NUR77.
R-HSA-211163	AKT-mediated inactivation of FOXO1A	The unphosphorylated form of FOXO1A shuttles between the nucleus and cytoplasm, maintaining a substantial concentration of this protein in the nucleoplasm, where it functions as a transcription factor. Phosphorylation of the protein, catalyzed by activated AKT, causes its exclusion from the nucleus (Zhang et al. 2002).
R-HSA-112122	ALKBH2 mediated reversal of alkylation damage	AlkB is an E.coli alpha-ketoglutarate- and Fe(II)-dependent dioxygenase that oxidizes the relevant methyl groups and releases them as formaldehyde. Two human homologs of AlkB, ALKBH2 and ALKBH3, both remove 1-methyladenine (1-meA) and 3-methylcytosine (3-meC) from methylated polynucleotides in an alpha-ketoglutarate-dependent reaction. They act by direct damage reversal with the regeneration of the unsubstituted bases. E.coli AlkB and human ALKBH2 and ALKBH3 can also repair 1-ethyladenine (1-etA) residues in DNA with the release of acetaldehyde (Duncan et al., 2002, Lee et al. 2005).
R-HSA-112126	ALKBH3 mediated reversal of alkylation damage	ALKBH3, like ALKBH2, is a homolog of E.coli alpha-ketoglutarate- and Fe(II)-dependent dioxygenase AlkB that oxidizes methyl groups on alkylated DNA bases and releases them as formaldehyde. Like ALKBH2, ALKBH3 removes 1-methyladenine (1-meA) and 3-methylcytosine (3-meC) from methylated polynucleotides in an alpha-ketoglutarate-dependent reaction and regenerates unsubstituted bases. Like ALKBH2, ALKBH3 can also repair 1-ethyladenine (1-etA) residues in DNA with the release of acetaldehyde (Duncan et al., 2002, Lee et al. 2005). While ALKBH2 has a preference for double strand DNA (dsDNA), ALKBH3 has a preference for single strand DNA (ssDNA). ALKBH3 efficiently repairs dsDNA in the presence of ASCC3 DNA helicase, which unwinds dsDNA, thus providing the single strand substrate for ALKBH3 (Dango et al. 2011).
R-HSA-1462054	Alpha-defensins	Humans have 7 alpha defensin genes plus 5 pseudogenes (see HGNC at http://www.genenames.org/genefamilies/DEFA). Alpha-defensins have six cysteines linked 1-6, 2-4, 3-5. The canonical sequence of alpha-defensins in humans is x1-2CXCRx2-3Cx3Ex3GxCx3Gx5CCx1-4, where x represents any amino acid residue. <br>Human alpha-defensins 1-4 are often called human neutrophil peptides (HNP1-4) as they were initially identified in neutrophil primary (azurophilic) granules. Alpha-defensins 5 and 6 (HD5, HD6) are products of Paneth cells. HNP-1 and -3 peptides are 30 residues long, differing only in the first amino acid. They are encoded by the genes DEFA1 and DEFA3 respectively. These exhibit copy number polymorphism, with some individuals having 4-14 copies per diploid genome, while 10-37% of individuals have no copies of DEFA3 (Aldred et al. 2005, Linzmier & Ganz 2005, Ballana et al. 2007). HNP-4, encoded by DEFA4, is 33 amino acids long of which 22 differ from the other HNPs (Wilde et al. 1989). It is a minor component of neutrophil granules compared to HNP1-3. In contrast to DEFA1 and DEFA3, the genes for HNP-4, HD-5 and HD-6 are only found as two copies per diploid genome (Linzmeier & Ganz 2005). HNP-2 is 29 amino acids in length and is the proteolytic product of cleavage of the N-terminal amino acid from either HNP-1 and/or HNP-3 (Selsted et al. 1985). 
R-HSA-2046104	alpha-linolenic (omega3) and linoleic (omega6) acid metabolism	There are two major classes of polyunsaturated fatty acids (PUFAs): the omega-3 (n-3) and the omega-6 (n-6) fatty acids, where the number corresponds to the position of the first double bond proximate to the methyl end of the fatty acid. Omega-3 and omega-6 fatty acids are considered essential fatty acids. Humans cannot synthesize them, instead they are supplied through diet. Linoleic acid (LA, 18:2(n-6)), a major component of omega-6 fatty acids and alpha-linolenic acid (ALA, 18:2(n-3)) a major component of omega-3 fatty acids are the two main dietary essential fatty acids (EFAs) in humans. ALA and LA obtained from diet are converted in the body into their longer chain and more unsaturated omega-3 and omega-6 products by a series of desaturation and elongation steps. Metabolism of ALA and LA to their corresponding products is mediated via common enzyme systems. In humans ALA is finally converted to docosahexaenoic acid (DHA, C22:6(n-3)), and LA is converted to docosapentaenoic acid (DPA, C22:5(n-6)). The intermediary omega-3 and omega-6 series fatty acids play a significant role in health and disease by generating potent modulatory molecules for inflammatory responses, including eicosanoids (prostaglandins, and leukotrienes), and cytokines (interleukins) and affecting the gene expression of various bioactive molecules (Kapoor & Huang 2006, Sprecher 2002, Burdge 2006).
R-HSA-2046106	alpha-linolenic acid (ALA) metabolism	Alpha-linolenic acid (ALA, 18:3(n-3)) is an omega-3 fatty acid, supplied through diet as it cannot be synthesized by humans. ALA has an important role in human health. It is converted to long chain more unsaturated n-3 fatty acids by a series of alternating desaturation and elongation reactions. Omega-3 products of ALA such as eicosapentaenoic acid (EPA) and docosahexaenoic acid (DHA) reduce inflammation and may help lower risk of chronic diseases, such as heart disease and arthritis. All the desaturation and elongation steps occur in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) except for the final step which requires translocation to peroxisomes for partial beta-oxidation.<br><br>The alpha-linolenic acid pathway involves the following steps: 18:3(n-3)--> 18:4(n-3)-->20:4(n-3)-->20:5(n-3)-->22:5(n-3)-->24:5(n-3)-->24:6(n-3)-->22:6(n-3). Two desaturation enzymes are involved in this process: delta-6 desaturase that converts 18:3(n-3) to 18:4(n-3) and 24:5(n-3) to 24:6(n-3) respectively, delta-5 desaturase 20:4(n-3) to 20:5(n-3). (Sprecher 2002).
R-HSA-389599	Alpha-oxidation of phytanate	Phytanic acid arises through ruminant metabolism of chlorophyll and enters the human diet as a constituent of dairy products (Baxter 1968). It can act as an agonist for PPAR and other nuclear hormone receptors, but its normal role in human physiology, if any, is unclear. It is catabolized via a five-step alpha-oxidation reaction sequence that yields pristanoyl-CoA, which is turn is a substrate for beta-oxidation. These reactions take place in the peroxisomal matrix and their failure is associated with Refsum disease (Wanders et al. 2003).
R-HSA-173736	Alternative complement activation	The proteins participating in alternative pathway activation are C3 (and C3b), the factors B, D, and properdin. In the first place, alternative pathway activation is a positive feedback mechanism to increase C3b. When C3b binds covalently to sugars on a cell surface, it can become protected. Then Factor B binds to C3b. In the presence of Factor D, bound Factor B is cleaved to Ba and Bb. Bb contains the active site for a C3 convertase. Properdin then binds to C3bBb to stabilize the C3bBb convertase on cell surface leading to cleavage of C3. Finally, a C3bBb3b complex forms and this is a C5 convertase.
R-HSA-4839748	AMER1 mutants destabilize the destruction complex	AMER1/WTX is a component of the destruction complex that interacts directly with beta-catenin through its C-terminal half. Depletion of AMER1 through siRNA stabilizes cellular beta-catenin levels and increases transcriptional activity in a reporter assay consistent with a role for AMER1 in the degradation of beta-catenin (Major et al, 2007). Deletions of the entire AMER1 gene have been reported in Wilms tumor, as have nonsense and missense mutations that truncate the protein before the beta-catenin interaction domain. These mutations are predicted to stabilize beta-catenin and increase WNT signaling (reviewed in Saito-Diaz et al, 2013; Huff, 2011).
R-HSA-425428	Amine compound SLC transporters	Five SLC gene families encode proteins that mediate transport of amines (neurotransmitters, biogenic amines, ammonium and choline). They are SLC6, SLC14, SLC18, SLC42. The fifth family, SLC22, will appear in a later release (He L et al, 2009).
R-HSA-375280	Amine ligand-binding receptors	The class A (rhodopsin-like) GPCRs that bind to classical biogenic amine ligands are annotated here. The amines involved (acetylcholine, adrenaline, noradrenaline, dopamine, serotonin and histamine) can all act as neurotransmitters in humans. The so-called 'trace amines', used when referring to p-tyramine, beta-phenylethylamine, tryptamine and octopamine, can also bind to recently-discovered GPCRs.
R-HSA-140179	Amine Oxidase reactions	Human amine oxidases (AO) catalyze the oxidative deamination of biogenic amines (neurotransmitters such as serotonin, noradrenaline, the hormone adrenaline and polyamines such as the spermines) and xenobiotic amines (exogenous dietary tyramine and phenylethylamine). The basic reaction is the oxidative cleavage of the alpha-H to form an imine product with the concomitant reduction of a FAD cofactor. The imine product then hydrolyses to an aldehyde and ammonia (or amine for secondary and tertiary amine substrates). Reduced FAD is reoxidized to form hydrogen peroxide to complete the catalytic cycle.<p>The reaction can be summarized as</p><p><b>RCH2NH2 + H2O + O2 = RCHO + NH3 + H2O2</b></p><p>The resultant hydrogen peroxide is the source of the most toxic free radical, the hydroxyl radical (.OH). This free radical is produced in the Fenton reaction with the use of ferrous (Fe2+) iron.</p>
R-HSA-209776	Amine-derived hormones	Catecholamines and thyroxine are synthesized from tyrosine, and serotonin and melatonin from tryptophan.
R-HSA-425374	Amino acid and oligopeptide SLC transporters	Eight SLC gene families are involved in the transport of amino acids and oligopeptides.
R-HSA-156587	Amino Acid conjugation	Xenobiotics that contain either a carboxylic group or an aromatic hydroxylamine group are possible substrates for amino acid conjugation. Xenobiotics with a <i>carboxylic group</i> conjugate with an <i>amino group</i> of amino acids such as glycine, taurine and glutamine. The <i>hydroxylamine group</i> conjugates with the <i>carboxylic group</i> of amino acids such as proline and serine. The amino acid is first activated by an aminoacyl-tRNA-synthetase which then reacts with the hydroxylamine group to form a reactive N-ester. N-esters can degrade to form electrophilic nitrenium (R-N<sup>+</sup>-R') and carbonium (R-C<sup>+</sup>H<sub>2</sub>) ions. The pyrolysis product of tryptophan, an N-hydroxy intermediate, can potentially form these reactive electrophilic ions.
R-HSA-70614	Amino acid synthesis and interconversion (transamination)	These reactions mediate the synthesis of aspartate, asparagine, glutamate, and glutamine from ammonia and intermediates of glycolysis, and allow the utilization of the carbon atoms from these four amino acids for glucose synthesis under fasting conditions.<P>These reactions also provide a means to collect nitrogen, both as ammonia and as amino groups, and direct it towards urea synthesis. Transamination, the conversion of an amino acid to the corresponding alpha-keto acid coupled to the conversion of a molecule of alpha-ketoglutarate to glutamate, is the first step in the catabolism of most amino acids. Transamination reactions are freely reversible so they also provide a means to balance concentrations of various amino acids and alpha-keto (2-oxo) acids in the cytosol.
R-HSA-352230	Amino acid transport across the plasma membrane	Amino acid transport across plasma membranes is critical to the uptake of these molecules from the gut, to their reabsortion in the kidney proximal tubulues, and to their distribution to cells in which they are required for the synthesis of proteins and of amino acid derived small molecules such as neurotransmitters. Physiological studies have defined 18 "systems" that mediate amino acid transport, each characterized by its amino acid substrates, as well as its pH sensitivity and its association (or not) with ion transport. More recently, molecular cloning studies have allowed the identification of the plasma membrane transport proteins that mediate these reactions. Amino acid uptake mediated by 17 of these transporters is annotated here (Broer 2008).
R-HSA-163680	AMPK inhibits chREBP transcriptional activation activity	AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK) is a sensor of cellular energy levels. A high cellular ratio of AMP:ATP triggers the phosphorylation and activation of AMPK. Activated AMPK in turn phosphorylates a wide array of target proteins, as shown in the figure below (reproduced from (Hardie et al. 2003), with the permission of D.G. Hardie). These targets include ChREBP (Carbohydrate Response Element Binding Protein), whose inactivation by phosphorylation reduces transcription of key enzymes of the glycolytic and lipogenic pathways.
R-HSA-141444	Amplification  of signal from unattached  kinetochores via a MAD2  inhibitory signal	The signal from unattached kinetochores is amplified through a Mad2 inhibitory signal that is propagated by the binding of Mad1 to the kinetochore, the association of Mad2 with Mad1, the conversion of Mad2 conformation to an inhibitory form through its association with Mad1 and finally the release of the inhibitory form of Mad2 from the kinetochore.
R-HSA-141424	Amplification of signal from the kinetochores	A single unattached kinetochore is capable of preventing cells from exiting mitosis. The mitotic checkpoint provides a way for a localized defect to affect the global biochemical status of the cell. In principle, the signal that is generated at an unattached kinetochore diffuses throughout the cell to affect its target. There are currently two models for how this is achieved. One model is based on the observation that the Mad2 checkpoint protein binds and is rapidly released from unattached kinetochores. The kinetochore is believed to act as a catalyst that converts Mad2 into an inhibitory state that diffuses throughout the cell upon its release from the kinetochore. A second model proposes that the signal is amplified by a kinase cascade much like a conventional signal transduction pathway. This kinase cascade is believed to be comprised of the checkpoint kinases, hBUBR1, hBUB1, hMPS1.
R-HSA-977225	Amyloid formation	Amyloid is a term used to describe typically extracellular deposits of aggregated proteins, sometimes known as plaques. Abnormal accumulation of amyloid is amyloidosis, a term associated with diseased organs and tissues, particularly neurodegenerative diseases such as Alzheimer's, Parkinson's and Huntingdon's. Amyloid deposits consist predominantly of amyloid fibrils, rigid, non-branching structures that form ordered assemblies, characteristically with a cross beta-sheet structure where the sheets run parallel to the direction of the fibril (Sawaya et al. 2007). Often the fibril has a left-handed twist (Nelson & Eisenberg 2006). At least 27 human proteins form amyloid fibrils (Sipe et al. 2010). Many of these proteins have non-pathological functions; the trigger that leads to abnormal aggregations differs between proteins and is not well understood but in many cases the peptides are abnormal fragments or mutant forms arising from polymorphisms, suggesting that the initial event may be aggregation of misfolded or unfolded peptides. Early studies of Amyloid-Beta assembly led to a widely accepted model that assembly was a nucleation-dependent polymerization reaction (Teplow 1998) but it is now understood to be more complex, with multiple 'off-pathway' events leading to a variety of oligomeric structures in addition to fibrils (Roychaudhuri et al. 2008). An increasing body of evidence suggests that these oligomeric forms are primarily responsible for the neurotoxic effects of Amyloid-beta (Roychaudhuri et al. 2008), alpha-synuclein (Winner et al. 2011) and tau (Dance & Strobel 2009, Meraz-Rios et al. 2010). Amyloid oligomers are believed to have a common structural motif that is independent of the protein involved and not present in fibrils (Kayed et al. 2003). Conformation dependent, aggregation specific antibodies suggest that there are 3 general classes of amyloid oligomer structures (Glabe 2009) including annular structures which may be responsible for the widely reported membrane permeabilization effect of amyloid oligomers. Toxicity of amyloid oligomers preceeds the appearance of plaques in mouse models (Ferretti et al. 2011). Fibrils are often associated with other molecules, notably heparan sulfate proteoglycans and Serum Amyloid P-component, which are universally associated and seem to stabilize fibrils, possibly by protecting them from degradation.
R-HSA-2214320	Anchoring fibril formation	Collagen VII forms anchoring fibrils, composed of antiparallel dimers that connect the dermis to the epidermis (Bruckner-Tuderman 2009, Has & Kern 2010). During fibrillogenesis, the nascent type VII procollagen molecules dimerize in an antiparallel manner. The C-propeptide is then removed by Bone morphogenetic protein 1 (Rattenholl et al. 2002) and the processed antiparallel dimers laterally aggregate (Villone et al. 2008, Gordon & Hahn 2010).
R-HSA-5620912	Anchoring of the basal body to the plasma membrane	The primary cilium is a microtubule-based organelle that is present on differentiated cells of nearly all eukaryotes. Cilium biogenesis is initiated by the docking of basal bodies, a centriole-derived organelle, to the plasma membrane (reviewed in Reiter et al, 2012). The centriole consists of a multiprotein core surrounded by a ring of nine microtubule triplets; the mother centriole additionally has 'distal' and 'subdistal appendages' that are critical for ciliogenesis (reviewed in Kim and Dynlacht, 2013; Firat-Karalar and Stearns, 2014; Bettencourt-Dias et al, 2011). Basal bodies initiate and anchor the extension of the axonemal microtubules and also associate with secretory vesicles which are thought to provide membrane components for the extension of the ciliary membrane (Sorokin, 1962; Sorokin, 1968; Bachmann-Gagescu et al, 2011; Tanos et al, 2013; reviewed in Ishikawa et al, 2011; Reiter et al, 2012). Basal bodies are attached to the plasma membrane through a proteinaceous network of transition fibers that form part of the 'transition zone' at the ciliary base. The transition zone acts as a selective barrier or ciliary pore, excluding vesicles and limiting the diffusion of proteins and lipids from the cytosol or plasma membrane (Deane et al, 2001; Craige et al, 2010; Garcia-Gonzalo et al, 2011; Ye et al, 2014; Joo et al, 2013; reviewed in Nachury et al, 2010; Hsiao et al, 2012; Reiter et al, 2012). In addition to the transition fibres, the transition zone also consists of the ciliary necklace (a row of protein particles at the ciliary membrane at the base of the cilium) and the Y-links (that connect the axonemal microtubules to the membrane at the ciliary necklace) (Williams et al, 2011; reviewed in Hsiao et al, 2012; Reiter et al, 2012).
R-HSA-193048	Androgen biosynthesis	Androgens are the determining factors for male development and behaviour in vertebrates (Miller 2002).
R-HSA-2473224	Antagonism of Activin by Follistatin	Both Follistatin (FST) and Follistatin-like-3 (FSTL3) irreversibly bind Activin dimers and prevent Activin from interacting with its receptor (reviewed in Schneyer et al. 2004 ,Xia and Schneyer 2009). Though functionally similar in vitro, FST and FSTL3 do not function identically in vivo. Mice lacking FST die shortly after birth due to defects in muscle and bone (Matzuk et al. 1995); mice lacking FSTL3 are viable but have altered glucose metabolism (Mukherjee et al. 2007).
R-HSA-983695	Antigen activates B Cell Receptor (BCR) leading to generation of second messengers	Mature B cells express IgM and IgD immunoglobulins which are complexed with Ig-alpha (CD79A, MB-1) and Ig-beta (CD79B, B29) to form the B cell receptor (BCR) (Fu et al. 1974, Fu et al. 1975, Kunkel et al. 1975, Van Noesal et al. 1992, Sanchez et al. 1993, reviewed in Brezski and Monroe 2008). Binding of antigen to the immunoglobulin activates phosphorylation of immunoreceptor tyrosine-based activation motifs (ITAMs) in the cytoplasmic tails of Ig-alpha and Ig-beta by Src family tyrosine kinases, including LYN, FYN, and BLK (Nel et al. 1984, Yamanashi et al. 1991, Flaswinkel and Reth 1994, Saouaf et al. 1994, Hata et al. 1994, Saouaf et al. 1995, reviewed in Gauld and Cambier 2004, reviewed in Harwood and Batista 2010). The protein kinase SYK may also be involved in phosphorylating the ITAMs.<br>The protein kinase SYK binds the phosphorylated immunoreceptor tyrosine-activated motifs (ITAMs) on the cytoplasmic tails of Ig-alpha (CD79A, MB-1) and Ig-beta (CD79B, B29) (Wienands et al. 1995, Rowley et al. 1995, Tsang et al. 2008). The binding causes the activation and autophosphorylation of SYK (Law et al. 1994, Irish et al. 2006, Baldock et al. 2008, Tsang et al. 2008, reviewed in Bradshaw 2010).<br>Activated SYK and other kinases phosphorylate BLNK (SLP-65, BASH) and BCAP. LYN and FYN phosphorylate CD19. Phosphorylated BLNK, BCAP, and CD19 serve as scaffolds which recruit effectors to the plasma membrane and assemble large complexes, the signalosomes. BCAP and CD19 recruit phosphoinositol 3-kinase (PI3K). BLNK recruits phospholipase C gamma (predominantly PLC-gamma2 in B cells, Coggeshall et al. 1992), NCK, BAM32, BTK, VAV1, and SHC. The effectors are phosphorylated by SYK and other kinases.<br>Phosphorylated BCAP recruits PI3K, which is phosphorylated by a SYK-dependent mechanism (Kuwahara et al. 1996) and produces phosphatidylinositol-3,4,5-trisphosphate (PIP3). Phosphorylated CD19 likewise recruits PIP3K. PIP3 recruits BAM32 (Marshall et al. 2000) and BTK (de Weers et al. 1994, Baba et al. 2001) to the plasma membrane via their PH domains. PIP3 also recruits and activates PLC-gamma1 and PLC-gamma2 (Bae et al. 1998). BTK binds phosphorylated BLNK via its SH2 domain (Baba et al. 2001). BTK phosphorylates PLC-gamma2 (Rodriguez et al. 2001), which activates phospholipase activity (Carter et al. 1991, Roifman and Wang 1992, Kim et al. 2004, Sekiya et al. 2004). Phosphorylated BLNK recruits PLC-gamma, VAV, GRB2, and NCK (Fu and Chan 1997, Fu et al. 1998, Chiu et al. 2002).<br>PLC-gamma hydrolyzes phosphatidylinositol-4,5-bisphosphate to yield inositol-1,4,5-trisphosphate (IP3) and diacylglycerol (Carter et al. 1991, Kim et al. 2004). IP3 binds receptors on the endoplasmic reticulum and causes release of Ca2+ ions from the ER into the cytosol. The depletion of calcium from the ER in turn activates STIM1 to interact with ORAI and TRPC1 channels (and possibly other TRP channels) in the plasma membrane, resulting in an influx of extracellular calcium ions (Mori et al. 2002, Muik et al. 2008, Luik et al. 2008, Park et al. 2009).
R-HSA-983170	Antigen Presentation: Folding, assembly and peptide loading of class I MHC	Unlike other glycoproteins, correct folding of MHC class I molecules is not sufficient to trigger their exit from the ER, they exit only after peptide loading. Described here is the process of antigen presentation which consists of the folding, assembly, and peptide loading of MHC class I molecules. The newly synthesized MHC class I Heavy Chain (HC) is initially folded with the help of several chaperones (calnexin, BiP, ERp57) and then binds with Beta-2-microglobulin (B2M). This MHC:B2M heterodimer enters the peptide loading complex (PLC), a multiprotein complex that includes calreticulin, endoplasmic reticulum resident protein 57 (ERp57), transporter associated with antigen processing (TAP) and tapasin. Peptides generated from Ub-proteolysis are transported into the ER through TAP. These peptides are further trimmed by ER-associated aminopeptidase (ERAP) and loaded on to MHC class I molecules. Stable MHC class I trimers with high-affinity peptide are transported from the ER to the cell surface by the Golgi apparatus.
R-HSA-1236975	Antigen processing-Cross presentation	MHC class I molecules generally present peptide antigens derived from proteins synthesized by the cell itself to CD8+ T cells. However, in some circumstances, antigens from extracellular environment can be presented on MHC class I to stimulate CD8+ T cell immunity, a process termed cross-presentation (Rock & Shen. 2005). Cross-presentation/cross-priming is the ability of antigen presenting cells (APCs) to present exogenous antigens on MHC class I molecules to CD8+ T lymphocytes. Among all the APCs, Dendritic cells (DC) are the dominant antigen cross presenting cell types in vivo, although macrophages and B cells appear to cross present model antigens in vitro with a low degree of efficiency (Amigorena & Savina. 2010, Ackermann & Peter Cresswell. 2004). Compared to macrophages, DCs have low levels of lysosomal proteases and exhibit limited lysosomal degradation (Delamarre et al. 2005). This limited proteolysis of internalized antigens by DCs might contribute to their high efficiency for cross presentation (Monua & Trombetta. 2007). APCs acquire the exogenous antigens through endocytic mechanisms, especially phagosomes for particulate/cell-associated antigens and endosomes for soluble protein antigens. There does not seem to be a unique pathway for cross-presentation but rather different potential mechanisms of cross-presentation have been proposed. These proposed pathways can be classified according to the location where two key events occur: 1) processing of the antigenic protein and 2) loading of the processed peptide on to MHC I molecule (Blanchard & Shastri. 2010). Based on the requirement for TAP and cytosolic proteases two mechanisms have been described, a cytosolic pathway (TAP-dependent and proteasome-dependent) or a vacuolar pathway (TAP- and proteasome-independent) (Blanchard & Shastri. 2010, Amigorena & Savina. 2010). Regarding peptide-loading, MHC I could be loaded in the ER or in the phagosome and recycled to cell surface (Blanchard & Shastri. 2010). Exogenous soluble antigens are cross-presented by dendritic cells, albeit with lower efficiency than for particulate substrates. Soluble antigens destined for cross-presentation are taken up by distinct endocytosis mechanisms which route them into stable early endosomes and then to the cytoplasm for proteasomal degradation and peptide loading. The outcome of the cross presentation can be either tolerance or immunity (Rock & Shen. 2005).
R-HSA-983168	Antigen processing: Ubiquitination & Proteasome degradation	Intracellular foreign or aberrant host proteins are cleaved into peptide fragments of a precise size, such that they can be loaded on to class I MHC molecules and presented externally to cytotoxic T cells. The ubiquitin-26S proteasome system plays a central role in the generation of these class I MHC antigens. <br>Ubiquitination is the mechanism of adding ubiquitin to lysine residues on substrate protein leading to the formation of a polyubiquitinated substrate. This process involves three classes of enzyme, an E1 ubiquitin-activating enzyme, an E2 ubiquitin-conjugating enzyme, and an E3 ubiquitin ligase. Polyubiquitination through lysine-48 (K48) generally targets the substrate protein for proteasomal destruction. The protease responsible for the degradation of K48-polyubiquitinated proteins is the 26S proteasome. This proteasome is a two subunit protein complex composed of the 20S (catalytic core) and 19S (regulatory) proteasome complexes. The proteasome eliminates most of the foreign and non-functional proteins from the cell by degrading them into short peptides; only a small fraction of the peptides generated are of the correct length to be presented by the MHC class I system. It has been calculated that between 994 and 3122 protein molecules have to be degraded for the formation of a single, stable MHC class I complex at the cell surface, with an average effciency of 1 in 2000 (Kloetzel et al. 2004, Princiotta et al. 2003). 
R-HSA-1169410	Antiviral mechanism by IFN-stimulated genes	The ISG proteins generated by IFN pathways plays key roles in the induction of innate and adaptive immune responses.
R-HSA-5467333	APC truncation mutants are not K63 polyubiquitinated	APC has been shown to be reversibly modified with K63-linked polyubiquitin chains. This modification is required for the association is required for the assembly of the destruction complex and subsequent degradation of beta-catenin in the absence of WNT ligand. K63-polyubiquitination of APC is lacking in a number of colorectal cancer cell lines expressing truncated forms of APC, and these lines have aberrantly high beta-catenin levels and WNT pathway activation (Tran and Polakis, 2012).
R-HSA-5467337	APC truncation mutants have impaired AXIN binding	Mutations in the APC tumor suppressor gene are common in colorectal and other cancers and cluster in the central mutation cluster region (MCR) of the gene (Miyoshi et al, 1992; Nagase and Nakamura, 1993; Dihlmann et al, 1999; reviewed in Bienz and Clevers, 2000). These mutations generally result in truncated proteins that destabilize the destruction complex and result in elevated WNT pathway activation (reviewed in Polakis, 2000).
R-HSA-179409	APC-Cdc20 mediated degradation of Nek2A	Like Cyclin A, NIMA-related kinase 2A (Nek2A) is degraded during pro-metaphase in a checkpoint-independent manner.
R-HSA-174143	APC/C-mediated degradation of cell cycle proteins	The Anaphase Promoting Complex or Cyclosome (APC/C) functions during mitosis to promote sister chromatid separation and mitotic exit through the degradation of mitotic cyclins and securin. This complex is also active in interphase insuring the appropriate length of the G1 phase (reviewed in Peters, 2002). The APC/C contains at least 12 subunits and functions as an ubiquitin-protein ligase (E3) promoting the multiubiquitination of its target proteins (see Gieffers et al., 2001). <br>In the ubiquitination reaction, ubiquitin is activated by the formation of a thioester bond with the (E1) ubiquitin activating enzyme then transferred to a cysteine residue within the ubiquitin conjugating enzyme (E2) and ultimately to a lysine residue within the target protein, with the aid of ubiquitin-protein ligase activity of the APC/C. The ubiquitin chains generated are believed to target proteins for destruction by the 26S proteasome (Reviewed in Peters, 1994 ) <br>The activity of the APC/C is highly periodic during the cell cycle and is controlled by a combination of regulatory events. The APC/C is activated by phosphorylation and the regulated recruitment of activating subunits and is negatively regulated by sequestration by kinetochore-associated checkpoint proteins. The Emi1 protein associates with Cdh1 and Cdc20, inhibiting the APC/C between G1/S and prophase. RSSA1 may play a similar role in ihibiting the APC during early mitosis.<br>Following phosphorylation of the APC/C core subunits by mitotic kinases, the activating subunit, Cdc20 is recruited to the APC/C and is responsible for mitotic activities, including the initiation of sister chromatid separation and the timing of exit from mitosis (See Zachariae and Nasmyth, 1999). Substrates of the Cdc20:APC/C complex, which are recognized by a motif known as the destruction box (D box) include Cyclin A, Nek2, Securin and Cyclin B. Degradation of Securin and Cyclin B does not occur until the mitotic spindle checkpoint has been satisfied (see Castro et al. 2005).<br>Cdc20 is degraded late in mitosis (Reviewed in Owens and Hoyt, 2005). At this time the activating subunit, Cdh1, previously maintained in an inactive phosphorylated state by mitotic kinases, is dephosphorylated and associates with and activates the APC/C. The APC/C:Cdh1 complex recognizes substrates containing a D box, a KEN box (Pfleger and Kirschner, 2000) or a D box activated (DAD) domain (Castro et al., 2002) sequence and promotes the ordered degration of mitotic cyclins and other mitotic proteins culminating with its own ubiquitin-conjugating enzyme (E2) subunit UbcH10 (Rape et al., 2006). This ordered degradation promotes the stability of Cyclin A at the end of G1. This stabilization, in turn, promotes the phosphorylation of Cdh1 and its abrupt dissociation from the APC/C, allowing accumulation of cyclins for the next G1/S transition (Sorensen et al., 2001). <br><br>
R-HSA-174048	APC/C:Cdc20 mediated degradation of Cyclin B	The degradation of cyclin B1, which appears to occur at the mitotic spindle, is delayed until the metaphase /anaphase transition by the spindle assembly checkpoint and is required in order for sister chromatids to separate (Geley et al. 2001;Hagting et al, 2002).
R-HSA-176409	APC/C:Cdc20 mediated degradation of mitotic proteins	Following phosphorylation of the APC/C core subunits by mitotic kinases, the activating protein, Cdc20 is recruited to the APC and promotes the multiubiquitination and subsequent degradation of the mitotic cyclins (Cyclin A and Cyclin B) as well as the protein securin which functions in sister chromatid cohesion. Timely degradation of these proteins is essential for sister chromatid separation and the proper timing of exit from mitosis (See Zachariae and Nasmyth, 1999). Cdc20 is degraded late in mitosis (Reviewed in Owens and Hoyt, 2005)
R-HSA-174154	APC/C:Cdc20 mediated degradation of Securin	The separation of sister chromatids in anaphase requires the destruction of the anaphase inhibitor, securin. Securin associates with and inactivates the protease, separase. Separase cleaves the cohesin subunit, Scc1 that is responsible for the cohesion of sister chromatids (reviewed in Nasmyth et al., 2000). Securin destruction begins at metaphase after the mitotic spindle checkpoint has been satisfied (Hagting et al., 2002).
R-HSA-174178	APC/C:Cdh1 mediated degradation of Cdc20 and other APC/C:Cdh1 targeted proteins in late mitosis/early G1	From late mitosis through G1 phase APC/C:Cdh1 insures the continued degradation of the mitotic proteins and during mitotic exit and G1 its substrates include Cdc20, Plk1, Aurora A, Cdc6 and Geminin (see Castro et al., 2005). Rape et al. have recently demonstrated that the order in which APC/C targeted proteins are degraded is determined by the processivity of multiubiquitination of these substrates. Processive substrates acquire a polyubiquitin chain upon binding to the APC/C once and are degraded. Distributive substrates bind, dissociate and reassociate with the APC/C multiple times before acquiring an ubiquitin chain of sufficient length to insure degradation. In addition, distributive substrates that dissociate from the APC/C with short ubiquitin chains are targeted for deubiquitination (Rape et al., 2006).
R-HSA-179419	APC:Cdc20 mediated degradation of cell cycle proteins prior to satisfation of the cell cycle checkpoint	APC:CDC20 mediates the degradation of a number of cell cycle proteins including Cyclin A and Nek2A.
R-HSA-5649702	APEX1-Independent Resolution of AP Sites via the Single Nucleotide Replacement Pathway	NEIL1 and NEIL2 have a dual DNA glycosylase and beta/delta lyase activity. The AP (apurinic/apyrimidinic) site-directed lyase activity of NEIL1 and NEIL2 is their major physiological role, as they can act on AP sites generated spontaneously or by other DNA glycosylases. NEIL1 or NEIL2 cleave the damaged DNA strand 5' to the AP site, producing a 3' phosphate terminus (3'Pi) and a 5' deoxyribose phosphate terminus (5'dRP). DNA polymerase beta (POLB) excises 5'dRP residue but is unable to add the replacement nucleotide to DNA with the 3'Pi end. PNKP, a DNA 3' phosphatase, removes 3'Pi and enables POLB to incorporate the replacement nucleotide, which is followed by ligation of repaired DNA strand by XRCC1:LIG3 complex (Whitehouse et al. 2001, Wiederhold et al. 2004, Das et al. 2006).
R-HSA-180689	APOBEC3G mediated resistance to HIV-1 infection	Representatives of the apolipoprotein B mRNA editing enzyme catalytic polypeptide 3 (APOBEC3) family provide innate resistance to exogeneous and endogenous retroviruses (see Cullen 2006 for a recent review). Humans and other primates encode a cluster of seven different cytidine deaminases with APOBEC3G, APOBEC3F and APOBEC3B having some anti HIV-1 activity. Our understanding is most complete for APOBEC3G which has been described first and the reactions described herein will focus on this representative enzyme.<br><br>APOBEC3G is a cytoplasmic protein which strongly restricts replication of Vif deficient HIV-1 (Sheehy 2002). It is expressed in cell populations that are susceptible to HIV infection (e.g., T-lymphocytes and macrophages). In the producer cell, APOBEC3G is incorporated into budding HIV-1 particles through an interaction with HIV-1 gag nucleocapsid (NC) protein in a RNA-dependent fashion. <br><br>Within the newly infected cell (= target cell), virus-associated APOBEC3G regulates the infectivity of HIV-1 by deaminating cytidine to uracil in the minus-strand viral DNA intermediate during reverse transcription. Deamination results in the induction of G-to-A hypermutations in the plus-strand viral DNA which subsequently can either be integrated as a non-functional provirus or degraded before integration.
R-HSA-109581	Apoptosis	Apoptosis is a distinct form of cell death that is functionally and morphologically different from necrosis. Nuclear chromatin condensation, cytoplasmic shrinking, dilated endoplasmic reticulum, and membrane blebbing characterize apoptosis in general. Mitochondria remain morphologically unchanged. In 1972 Kerr et al introduced the concept of apoptosis as a distinct form of "cell-death", and the mechanisms of various apoptotic pathways are still being revealed today. <BR>The two principal pathways of apoptosis are (1) the Bcl-2 inhibitable or intrinsic pathway induced by various forms of stress like intracellular damage, developmental cues, and external stimuli and (2) the caspase 8/10 dependent or extrinsic pathway initiated by the engagement of death receptors<BR> The caspase 8/10 dependent or extrinsic pathway is a death receptor mediated mechanism that results in the activation of caspase-8 and caspase-10. Activation of death receptors like Fas/CD95, TNFR1, and the TRAIL receptor is promoted by the TNF family of ligands including FASL (APO1L OR CD95L), TNF, LT-alpha, LT-beta, CD40L, LIGHT, RANKL, BLYS/BAFF, and APO2L/TRAIL. These ligands are released in response to microbial infection, or as part of the cellular, humoral immunity responses during the formation of lymphoid organs, activation of dendritic cells, stimulation or survival of T, B, and natural killer (NK) cells, cytotoxic response to viral infection or oncogenic transformation. <BR> The Bcl-2 inhibitable or intrinsic pathway of apoptosis is a stress-inducible process, and acts through the activation of caspase-9 via Apaf-1 and cytochrome c. The rupture of the mitochondrial membrane, a rapid process involving some of the Bcl-2 family proteins, releases these molecules into the cytoplasm. Examples of cellular processes that may induce the intrinsic pathway in response to various damage signals include: auto reactivity in lymphocytes, cytokine deprivation, calcium flux or cellular damage by cytotoxic drugs like taxol, deprivation of nutrients like glucose and growth factors like EGF, anoikis, transactivation of target genes by tumor suppressors including p53.<BR> In many non-immune cells, death signals initiated by the extrinsic pathway are amplified by connections to the intrinsic pathway. The connecting link appears to be the truncated BID (tBID) protein a proteolytic cleavage product mediated by caspase-8 or other enzymes.
R-HSA-140342	Apoptosis induced DNA fragmentation	DNA fragmentation in response to apoptotic signals is achieved through the activity of two apoptotic nucleases, termed DNA fragmentation factor (DFF) or caspase-activated DNase (CAD) and endonuclease G (Endo G) (reviewed in Widlak and Garrard, 2005). These endonucleases cleave chromatin producing 3'-hydroxyl groups and 5'-phosphate residues. 50-300 kb cleavage products are produced followed by internucleosomal DNA fragmentation. Although the activities of DFF and Endo G are similar, they reside in different locations within the cell and are regulated in different ways. 
R-HSA-351906	Apoptotic cleavage of cell adhesion  proteins	Apoptotic cells show dramatic rearrangements of tight junctions, adherens junctions, and desmosomes (Abreu et al., 2000). Desmosome-specific members of the cadherin superfamily of cell adhesion molecules including desmoglein-3, plakophilin-1 and desmoplakin are cleaved by caspases after onset of apoptosis (Weiske et al., 2001). Cleavage results in the disruption of the desmosome structure and thus contributes to cell rounding and disintegration of the intermediate filament system (Weiske et al., 2001).
R-HSA-111465	Apoptotic cleavage of cellular proteins	Apoptotic cell death is achieved by the caspase-mediated cleavage of various vital proteins. Among caspase targets are proteins such as E-cadherin, Beta-catenin, alpha fodrin, GAS2, FADK, alpha adducin, HIP-55, and desmoglein involved in cell adhesion and maintenance of the cytoskeletal architecture. Cleavage of proteins such as APC and CIAP1 can further stimulate apoptosis by produce proapoptotic proteins (reviewed in Fischer et al., 2003. See also Wee et al., 2006 and the CASVM Caspase Substrates Database: http://www.casbase.org/casvm/squery/index.html ).
R-HSA-75153	Apoptotic execution  phase	In the execution phase of apoptosis, effector caspases cleave vital cellular proteins leading to the morphological changes that characterize apoptosis. These changes include destruction of the nucleus and other organelles, DNA fragmentation, chromatin condensation, cell shrinkage and cell detachment and membrane blebbing (reviewed in Fischer et al., 2003).
R-HSA-111471	Apoptotic factor-mediated response	In response to apoptotic signals, mitochondrial proteins are released into the cytosol and activate both caspase-dependent and -independent cell death pathways. Cytochrome c induces apoptosome formation, AIF and endonuclease G function in caspase independent apoptotic nuclear DNA damage. Smac/DIABLO and HtrA2/OMI both promote caspase activation and caspase-independent cytotoxicity (Saelens et al., 2004).
R-HSA-445717	Aquaporin-mediated transport	Aquaporins (AQP's) are six-pass transmembrane proteins that form channels in membranes. Each monomer contains a central channel formed in part by two asparagine-proline-alanine motifs (NPA boxes) that confer selectivity for water and/or solutes. The monomers assemble into tetramers. Most aquaporins (i.e. AQP0/MIP, AQP1, AQP2, AQP3, AQP4, AQP5, AQP7, AQP8, AQP9, AQP10) passively transport water into and out of cells according to the osmotic gradient across the membrane. Four aquaporins (the aquaglyceroporins AQP3, AQP7, AQP9, AQP10) conduct glycerol, three aquaporins (AQP7, AQP9, AQP10) conduct urea, and one aquaporin (AQP6) conducts anions, especially nitrate. AQP8 also conducts ammonia in addition to water.<br>AQP11 and AQP12, classified as group III aquaporins, were identified as a result of the genome sequencing project and are characterized by having variations in the first NPA box when compared to more traditional aquaporins. Additionally, a conserved cysteine residue is present about 9 amino acids downstream from the second NPA box and this cysteine is considered indicative of group III aquaporins. Purified AQP11 incorporated into liposomes showed water transport. Knockout mice lacking AQP11 had fatal cyst formation in the proximal tubule of the kidney. Exogenously expressed AQP12 showed intracellular localization. AQP12 is expressed exclusively in pancreatic acinar cells.<br>Aquaporins are important in fluid and solute transport in various tissues. In adipocytes, glycerol generated by triglyceride hydrolysis is exported by AQP7 and is imported by liver cells via AQP9. AQP1 plays a role in forming cerebrospinal fluid and AQP1, AQP4, and AQP9 appear to be important in maintaining fluid balance in the brain. AQP0, AQP1, AQP3, AQP4, AQP8, AQP9, and AQP11 play roles in the physiology of the hepatobiliary tract. In the kidney, water and solutes are passed out of the bloodstream and into the proximal tubule via the slit-like structure formed by nephrin in the glomerulus. Water is reabsorbed from the filtrate during its transit through the proximal tubule, the descending loop of Henle, the distal convoluted tubule, and the collecting duct. Aquaporin-1 (AQP1) in the proximal tubule and the descending thin limb of Henle is responsible for about 90% of reabsorption (as estimated from mouse knockouts of AQP1). AQP1 is located on both the apical and basolateral surface of epithelial cells and thus transports water through the epithelium and back into the bloodstream. In the collecting duct epithelial cells have AQP2 on their apical surfaces and AQP3 and AQP4 on their basolateral surfaces to transport water across the epithelium. The permeability of the epithelium is regulated by vasopressin, which activates a signaling cascade leading to the phosphorylation of AQP2 and its translocation from intracellular vesicles to the apical membrane of collecting duct cells.<br>Here, three views of aquaporin-mediated transport have been annotated: a generic view of transport mediated by the various families of aquaporins independent of tissue type, a view of the role of specific aquaporins in maintenance of renal water balance, and a view of the role of specific aquaporins in glycerol transport from adipocytes to the liver.
R-HSA-426048	Arachidonate production from DAG	Diacylglycerol (DAG) is an important source of arachidonic acid, a signalling molecule and the precursor of the prostaglandins. In human platelet almost all the DAG produced from phosphatidylinositol degradation contains arachidonate (Takamura et al. 1987). DAG is hydrolysed by DAG lipase to 2-arachidonylglycerol (2-AG) which is further hydrolysed by monoacylglycerol lipase. 2-AG is an agonist of cannabinoid receptor 1.
R-HSA-2142753	Arachidonic acid metabolism	Eicosanoids, oxygenated, 20-carbon fatty acids, are autocrine and paracrine signaling molecules that modulate physiological processes including pain, fever, inflammation, blood clot formation, smooth muscle contraction and relaxation, and the release of gastric acid. Eicosanoids are synthesized in humans primarily from arachidonic acid (all-cis 5,8,11,14-eicosatetraenoic acid) that is released from membrane phospholipids. Once released, arachidonic acid is acted on by prostaglandin G/H synthases (PTGS, also known as cyclooxygenases (COX)) to form prostaglandins and thromboxanes, by arachidonate lipoxygenases (ALOX) to form leukotrienes, epoxygenases (cytochrome P450s and epoxide hydrolase) to form epoxides such as 15-eicosatetraenoic acids, and omega-hydrolases (cytochrome P450s) to form hydroxyeicosatetraenoic acids (Buczynski et al. 2009, Vance & Vance 2008).<br>Levels of free arachidonic acid in the cell are normally very low so the rate of synthesis of eicosanoids is determined primarily by the activity of phospholipase A2, which mediates phospholipid cleavage to generate free arachidonic acid. The enzymes involved in arachidonic acid metabolism are typically constitutively expressed so the subset of these enzymes expressed by a cell determines the range of eicosanoids it can synthesize.<br>Eicosanoids are unstable, undergoing conversion to inactive forms with half-times under physiological conditions of seconds or minutes. Many of these reactions appear to be spontaneous.
R-HSA-5624958	ARL13B-mediated ciliary trafficking of INPP5E	ARL13B is a ciliary-localized small GTPase with an atypical C-terminus containing a coiled coil domain and a proline rich domain (PRD) (Hori et al, 2008). Mutations in ARL13B are associated with the development of the ciliopathy Joubert's Syndrome (Cantagrel et al, 2008; Parisi et al, 2009). Studies in C. elegans and vertebrates suggest that ARL13B may play a role in stabilizing the interaction between the IFT A and B complexes and the kinesin-2 motors during anterograde traffic in the primary cilium (Cevik et al, 2010; Li et al, 2010; Cevik et al, 2013; reviewed in Li et al, 2012; Zhang et al, 2013). Recent work has shown an additional role for ARL13B in trafficking the inositol polyphosphate-5-phosphatase E (INPP5E) to the cilium through a network that also involves the phosphodiesterase PDE6D and the centriolar protein CEP164 (Humbert et al, 2012; Thomas et al, 2014; reviewed in Zhang et al, 2013). Mutations in INPP5E are also associated with the development of Joubert syndrome and other ciliopathies (Bielas et al, 2009; Jacoby et al, 2009; reviewed in Conduit et al, 2012).
R-HSA-170984	ARMS-mediated activation	ARMS (Ankyrin-Rich Membrane Spanning/Kidins 220) is a 220kD tetraspanning adaptor protein which becomes rapidly tyrosine phosphorylated by active Trk receptors. ARMS is another adaptor protein which is involved in the activation of Rap1 and the subsequent prolonged activation of the MAPK cascade.
R-HSA-211957	Aromatic amines can be N-hydroxylated or N-dealkylated by CYP1A2	CYP1A2 oxidizes a variety of structurally unrelated compounds, including steroids, fatty acids, and xenobiotics. It is most active in catalyzing N-hydroxylation or N-dealkylation reactions.
R-HSA-446203	Asparagine N-linked glycosylation	N-linked glycosylation is the most important form of post-translational modification for proteins synthesized and folded in the Endoplasmic Reticulum (Stanley et al. 2009). An early study in 1999 revealed that about 50% of the proteins in the Swiss-Prot database at the time were N-glycosylated (Apweiler et al. 1999). It is now established that the majority of the proteins in the secretory pathway require glycosylation in order to achieve proper folding.<br>The addition of an N-glycan to a protein can have several roles (Shental-Bechor & Levy 2009). First, glycans enhance the solubility and stability of the proteins in the ER, the golgi and on the outside of the cell membrane, where the composition of the medium is strongly hydrophilic and where proteins, that are mostly hydrophobic, have difficulty folding properly. Second, N-glycans are used as signal molecules during the folding and transport process of the protein: they have the role of labels to determine when a protein must interact with a chaperon, be transported to the golgi, or targeted for degradation in case of major folding defects. Third, and most importantly, N-glycans on completely folded proteins are involved in a wide range of processes: they help determine the specificity of membrane receptors in innate immunity or in cell-to-cell interactions, they can change the properties of hormones and secreted proteins, or of the proteins in the vesicular system inside the cell.<br>All N-linked glycans are derived from a common 14-sugar oligosaccharide synthesized in the ER, which is attached co-translationally to a protein while this is being translated inside the reticulum. The process of the synthesis of this glycan, known as Synthesis of the N-glycan precursor or LLO, constitutes one of the most conserved pathways in eukaryotes, and has been also observed in some eubacteria. The attachment usually happens on an asparagine residue within the consensus sequence asparagine-X-threonine by an complex called oligosaccharyl transferase (OST).<br>After being attached to an unfolded protein, the glycan is used as a label molecule in the folding process (also known as Calnexin/Calreticulin cycle) (Lederkremer 2009). The majority of the glycoproteins in the ER require at least one glycosylated residue in order to achieve proper folding, even if it has been shown that a smaller portion of the proteins in the ER can be folded without this modification.<br>Once the glycoprotein has achieved proper folding, it is transported via the cis-Golgi through all the Golgi compartments, where the glycan is further modified according to the properties of the glycoprotein. This process involves relatively few enzymes but due to its combinatorial nature, can lead to several millions of different possible modifications. The exact topography of this network of reactions has not been established yet, representing one of the major challenges after the sequencing of the human genome (Hossler et al. 2006).<br>Since N-glycosylation is involved in an great number of different processes, from cell-cell interaction to folding control, mutations in one of the genes involved in glycan assembly and/or modification can lead to severe development problems (often affecting the central nervous system). All the diseases in genes involved in glycosylation are collectively known as Congenital Disorders of Glycosylation (CDG) (Sparks et al. 2003), and classified as CDG type I for the genes in the LLO synthesis pathway, and CDG type II for the others.
R-HSA-2022090	Assembly of collagen fibrils and other multimeric structures	Collagen trimers in triple-helical form, referred to as procollagen or collagen molecules, are exported from the ER and trafficked through the Golgi network before secretion into the extracellular space. For fibrillar collagens namely types I, II, III, V, XI, XXIV and XXVII (Gordon & Hahn 2010, Ricard-Blum 2011) secretion is concomitant with processing of the N and C terminal collagen propeptides. These processed molecules are known as tropocollagens, considered to be the units of higher order collagen structures. They form within the extracellular space via a process that can proceed spontaneously, but in the cellular environment is regulated by many collagen binding proteins such as the FACIT (Fibril Associated Collagens with Interrupted Triple helices) family collagens and Small Leucine-Rich Proteoglycans (SLRPs). The architecture formed ultimately depends on the collagen subtype and the cellular conditions. Structures include the well-known fibrils and fibres formed by the major structural collagens type I and II plus several different types of supramolecular assembly (Bruckner 2010). The mechanical and physical properties of tissues depend on the spatial arrangement and composition of these collagen-containing structures (Kadler et al. 1996, Shoulders & Raines 2009, Birk & Bruckner 2011).<br><br> Fibrillar collagen structures are frequently heterotypic, composed of a major collagen type in association with smaller amounts of other types, e.g. type I collagen fibrils are associated with types III and V, while type II fibrils frequently contain types IX and XI (Wess 2005). Fibres composed exclusively of a single collagen type probably do not exist, as type I and II fibrils require collagens V and XI respectively as nucleators (Kadler et al. 2008, Wenstrup et al. 2011). Much of the structural understanding of collagen fibrils has been obtained with fibril-forming collagens, particularly type I, but some central features are believed to apply to at least the other fibrillar collagen subtypes (Wess 2005). Fibril diameter and length varies considerably, depending on the tissue and collagen types (Fang et al. 2012). The reasons for this are poorly understood (Wess 2005).<br><br>Some tissues such as skin have fibres that are approximately the same diameter while others such as tendon or cartilage have a bimodal distribution of thick and thin fibrils. Mature type I collagen fibrils in tendon are up to 1 cm in length, with a diameter of approx. 500 nm. An individual fibrillar collagen triple helix is less than 1.5 nm in diameter and around 300 nm long; collagen molecules must assemble to give rise to the higher-order fibril structure, a process known as fibrillogenesis, prevented by the presence of C-terminal propeptides (Kadler et al. 1987). In electron micrographs, fibrils have a banded appearance, due to regular gaps where fewer collagen molecules overlap, which occur because the fibrils are aligned in a quarter-stagger arrangement (Hodge & Petruska 1963). Collagen microfibrils are believed to have a quasi-hexagonal unit cell, with tropocollagen arranged to form supertwisted, right-handed microfibrils that interdigitate with neighbouring microfibrils, leading to a spiral-like structure for the mature collagen fibril (Orgel et al. 2006, Holmes & Kadler 2006).<br><br>Neighbouring tropocollagen monomers interact with each other and are cross-linked covalently by lysyl oxidase (Orgel et al. 2000, Maki 2006). Mature collagen fibrils are stabilized by lysyl oxidase-mediated cross-links. Hydroxylysyl pyridinoline and lysyl pyridinoline cross-links form between (hydroxy) lysine and hydroxylysine residues in bone and cartilage (Eyre et al. 1984). Arginoline cross-links can form in cartilage (Eyre et al. 2010); mature bovine articular cartilage contains roughly equimolar amounts of arginoline and hydroxylysyl pyridinoline based on peptide yields. Mature collagen fibrils in skin are stabilized by the lysyl oxidase-mediated cross-link histidinohydroxylysinonorleucine (Yamauch et al. 1987). Due to the quarter-staggered arrangement of collagen molecules in a fibril, telopeptides most often interact with the triple helix of a neighbouring collagen molecule in the fibril, except for collagen molecules in register staggered by 4D from another collagen molecule. Fibril aggregation in vitro can be unipolar or bipolar, influenced by temperature and levels of C-proteinase, suggesting a role for the N- and C- propeptides in regulation of the aggregation process (Kadler et al. 1996). In vivo, collagen molecules at the fibril surface may retain their N-propeptides, suggesting that this may limit further accretion, or alternatively represents a transient stage in a model whereby fibrils grow in diameter through a cycle of deposition, cleavage and further deposition (Chapman 1989).<br><br>In vivo, fibrils are often composed from more than one type of collagen. Type III collagen is found associated with type I collagen in dermal fibrils, with the collagen III on the periphery, suggesting a regulatory role (Fleischmajer et al. 1990). Type V collagen associates with type I collagen fibrils, where it may limit fibril diameter (Birk et al. 1990, White et al. 1997). Type IX associates with the surface of narrow diameter collagen II fibrils in cartilage and the cornea (Wu et al. 1992, Eyre et al. 2004). Highly specific patterns of crosslinking sites suggest that collagen IX functions in interfibrillar networking (Wess 2005). Type XII and XIV collagens are localized near the surface of banded collagen I fibrils (Nishiyama et al. 1994). Certain fibril-associated collagens with interrupted triple helices (FACITs) associate with the surface of collagen fibrils, where they may serve to limit fibril fusion and thereby regulate fibril diameter (Gordon & Hahn 2010). Collagen XV, a member of the multiplexin family, is almost exclusively associated with the fibrillar collagen network, in very close proximity to the basement membrane. In human tissues collagen XV is seen linking banded collagen fibers subjacent to the basement membrane (Amenta et al. 2005). Type XIV collagen, SLRPs and discoidin domain receptors also regulate fibrillogenesis (Ansorge et al. 2009, Kalamajski et al. 2010, Flynn et al. 2010).<br><br>Collagen IX is cross-linked to the surface of collagen type II fibrils (Eyre et al. 1987). Type XII and XIV collagens are found in association with type I (Walchli et al. 1994) and type II (Watt et al. 1992, Eyre 2002) fibrils in cartilage. They are thought to associate non-covalently via their COL1/NC1 domains (Watt et al. 1992, Eyre 2002). <br><br>Some non-fibrillar collagens form supramolecular assemblies that are distinct from typical fibrils. Collagen VII forms anchoring fibrils, composed of antiparallel dimers that connect the dermis to the epidermis (Bruckner-Tuderman 2009). During fibrillogenesis, the nascent type VII procollagen molecules dimerize in an antiparallel manner. The C-propeptides are then removed by Bone morphogenetic protein 1 (Rattenholl et al. 2002) and the processed antiparallel dimers aggregate laterally. Collagens VIII and X form hexagonal networks and collagen VI forms beaded filament (Gordon & Hahn 2010, Ricard-Blum et al. 2011).
R-HSA-175474	Assembly Of The HIV Virion	Virion assembly packages all the components required for infectivity. These steps include two copies of the positive sense genomic viral RNA, cellular tRNALys, the viral envelope (Env) protein, the Gag polyprotein, and the three viral enzymes: protease (PR), reverse transcriptase (RT), and integrase (IN). The viral enzymes are packaged as domains within the Gag-Pro-Pol polyprotein.
R-HSA-68616	Assembly of the ORC complex at the origin of replication	In Saccharomyces cerevisiae, the entire ORC complex is constitutively bound to the origin of replication. However, in mammalian cells, Orc1, and possibly other Orc subunits, dissociate from origins of replication, while Orc2 remains stably associated with chromatin across the cell cycle. The first step in formation of the pre-RC is assembly of the hexameric Origin Recognition Complex (ORC) at the origin of replication. Recent work on human (Hs) ORC has suggested that the heterohexamer assembles in an ordered manner. HsOrc2 appears to be constitutively bound to origins of replication. HsOrc2 and HsOrc3 form a complex that interacts with HsOrc4 and HsOrc5. Recruitment of HsOrc5 into the complex is important for the association of HsOrc1. HsOrc6 is also capable of interacting with the core HsOrc2:3:4:5 complex, but not smaller complexes. Interestingly, HsOrc1 and a subunit of the Mcm2-7 complex (HsMcm2) interact with a histone acetyltransferase, HsHBO1 (Bell & Stillman 1992; Diffley et al. 1994; Lee & Bell 1997; Wenger et al. 1975; Li & DePamphili;s 2001; Dhar et al. 2001; Vashee et al, 2001; Iizuka & Stillman 1999 Burke et al. 2001).
R-HSA-68867	Assembly of the pre-replicative complex	DNA replication pre-initiation in eukaryotic cells begins with the formation of the pre-replicative complex (pre-RC) during the late M phase and continues in the G1 phase of the mitotic cell cycle, a process also called DNA replication origin licensing. The association of initiation proteins (ORC, Cdc6, Cdt1, Mcm2-7) with the origin of replication in both <i>S. cerevisiae</i> and humans has been demonstrated by chromatin immunoprecipitation experiments. In <i>S. cerevisiae</i>, pre-replicative complexes are assembled from late M to G1. In mammalian cells as well, pre-replicative complexes are assembled from late M to G1, as shown by biochemical fractionation and immunostaining. There are significant sequence similarities among some of the proteins in the pre-replicative complex. The ORC subunits Orc1, Orc4 and Orc5 are homologous to one another and to Cdc6. The six subunits of the Mcm2-7 complex are homologous to one another. In addition, Orc1, Orc4, Orc5, Cdc6, and the Mcm2-7 subunits, are members of the AAA+ superfamily of ATPases. Since the initial identification of these pre-RC components other factors that participate in this complex have been found, including Cdt1 in human, <i>Xenopus</i>, <i>S. pombe</i>, and <i>S. cerevisiae</i> cells.
R-HSA-5617833	Assembly of the primary cilium	The primary cilium is one of two main types of cilia present on the surface of many eukaryotic cells (reviewed in Flieghauf et al, 2007). Unlike the motile cilia, which are generally present in large numbers on epithelial cells and are responsible for sensory function as well as wave-like beating motions, the primary cilium is a non-motile sensory organelle with roles in signaling and development and is present in a single copy at the apical surface of most quiescent cells (reviewed in Hsiao et al, 2012). Cilium biogenesis involves the anchoring of the basal body, a centriole-derived organelle, near the plasma membrane and the subsequent polymerization of the microtubule-based axoneme and extension of the plasma membrane (reviewed in Ishikawa and Marshall, 2011; Reiter et al, 2012). Although the ciliary membrane is continuous with the plasma membrane, the protein and lipid content of the cilium and the ciliary membrane are distinct from those of the bulk cytoplasm and plasma membrane (reviewed in Emmer et al, 2010; Rohatgi and Snell, 2010). This specialized compartment is established and maintained during cilium biogenesis by the formation of a ciliary transition zone, a proteinaceous structure that, with the transition fibres, anchors the basal body to the plasma membrane and acts as a ciliary pore to limit free diffusion from the cytosol to the cilium (reviewed in Nachury et al, 2010; Reiter et al, 2012). Ciliary components are targeted from the secretory system to the ciliary base and subsequently transported to the ciliary tip, where extension of the axoneme occurs, by a motor-driven process called intraflagellar transport (IFT). Anterograde transport of cargo from the ciliary base to the tip of the cilium requires kinesin-2 type motors, while the dynein-2 motor is required for retrograde transport back to the ciliary base. In addition, both anterograde and retrograde transport depend on the IFT complex, a multiprotein assembly consisting of two subcomplexes, IFT A and IFT B. The primary cilium is a dynamic structure that undergoes continuous steady-state turnover of tubulin at the tip; as a consequence, the IFT machinery is required for cilium maintenance as well as biogenesis (reviewed in Bhogaraju et al, 2013; Hsiao et al, 2012; Li et al, 2012; Taschner et al, 2012; Sung and Leroux, 2013). The importance of the primary cilium in signaling and cell biology is highlighted by the wide range of defects and disorders, collectively known as ciliopathies, that arise as the result of mutations in genes encoding components of the ciliary machinery (reviewed in Goetz and Anderson, 2010; Madhivanan and Aguilar, 2014).
R-HSA-168316	Assembly of Viral Components at the Budding Site	Following synthesis on membrane-bound ribosomes, the three viral integral membrane proteins, HA (hemagglutinin), NA (neuraminidase) and M2 (ion channel) enter the host endoplasmic reticulum (ER) where all three are folded and HA and NA are glycosylated. Subsequently HA is assembled into a trimer. HA, NA and M2 are transported to the Golgi apparatus where cysteine residues on HA and M2 are palmitoylated. Furin cleaves HA into HA1 and HA2 subunits and all three proteins are directed to the virus assembly site on the apical plasma membrane via apical sorting signals. The signals for HA and NA reside on the transmembrane domains (TMD) while the sorting signal for M2 is not yet characterized. The TMDs of HA and NA also contain the signals for lipid raft association. Lipid rafts are non-ionic detergent-resistant lipid microdomains within the plasma membrane that are rich in sphingolipids and cholesterol. Examination of purified virus particles indicates that influenza virus buds preferentially from these microdomains.
R-HSA-69298	Association of licensing factors with the pre-replicative complex	The eukaryotic six-subunit origin recognition complex (ORC) governs the initiation site of DNA replication and formation of the prereplication complex.
R-HSA-390471	Association of TriC/CCT with target proteins during biosynthesis	TRiC has broad recognition specificities, but in the cell it interacts with only a defined set of substrates (Yam et al. 2008). Many of its substrates that are targeted during biosynthesis are conserved between mammals and yeast (Yam et al. 2008).
R-HSA-210455	Astrocytic Glutamate-Glutamine Uptake And Metabolism	In astrocytic glutamate-glutamine cycle, the excess glutamate released by the pre-synaptic neuron in the synaptic cleft is transported into the astrocyte by a family glutamate transporters called the excitatory amino acid transporters 1 and 2, EAAT1 and EAAT2. Astrocytes carrying these transporters exist in close apposition to the synapse to clear excess glutamate to prevent excessive activation of neurons and hence neuronal death. Glutamate in astrocytes is converted to glutamine by glutamine synthetase. Glutamine is then transported into the extracellular space by system N transporters. The glutamate in the extracellular space is available for neuronal uptake.
R-HSA-4608870	Asymmetric localization of PCP proteins	One of the hallmarks of the Planar Cell Polarity pathway is the asymmetric distribution of proteins on opposite membranes of a single cell. In Drosophila, Stbm and Pk (homologues to the human VANGL1/2 and PRICKLE1/2/3) colocalize opposite Fz, Dsh and Dgo (FZD, DVL, and ANKRD6, respectively). The two complexes antagonize each other, with Fz:Dsh:Dgo acting to promote signaling downstream of Dsh, while the Stbm:Pk complex restricts this signaling (reviewed in Seifert and Mlodzik, 2007). Asymmetric localization of some PCP proteins is also seen in vertebrates (Montcouquiol et al, 2003, 2006; Wang et al, 2006, Narimatsu et al, 2009) although the patterns of localization differ from that of flies. The details of how localization is established and how the asymmetrical distribution of proteins is translated into gross morphological processes remain to be fully elucidated.
R-HSA-380994	ATF4 activates genes	ATF4 is a transcription factor and activates expression of IL-8, MCP1, IGFBP-1, CHOP, HERP1 and ATF3.
R-HSA-381183	ATF6-alpha activates chaperone genes	The N-terminal fragment of ATF6-alpha contains a bZIP domain and binds the sequence CCACG in ER Stress Response Elements (ERSEs). ATF6-alpha binds ERSEs together with the heterotrimeric transcription factor NF-Y, which binds the sequence CCAAT in the ERSEs, and together the two factors activate transcription of ER stress-responsive genes. Evidence from overexpression and knockdowns indicates that ATF6-alpha is a potent activator but its homolog ATF6-beta is not and ATF6-beta may actually reduce expression of ER stress proteins.
R-HSA-381033	ATF6-alpha activates chaperones	ATF6-alpha is a transmembrane protein that normally resides in the Endoplasmic Reticulum (ER) membrane. Here its luminal C-terminal domain is associated with BiP, shielding 2 Golgi-targeting regions and thus keeping ATF6-alpha in the ER. Upon interaction of BiP with unfolded proteins in the ER, ATF6-alpha dissociates and transits to the Golgi where it is cleaved by the S1P and S2P proteases that reside in the Golgi, releasing the N-terminal domain of ATF6-alpha into the cytosol. After transiting to the nucleus, the N-terminal domain acts as a transcription factor to activate genes encoding chaperones.
R-HSA-1296025	ATP sensitive Potassium channels	ATP sensitive K+ channels couple intracellular metabolism with membrane excitability. These channels are inhibited by ATP so are open in low metabolic states and close in high metabolic states, resulting in membrane depolarization triggering responses such as insulin secretion, modulation of vascular smooth muscle and cardioprotection. The channel comprises four Kir6.x subunits and four regulatory sulphonylurea receptors (SUR) (Akrouh et al, 2009).
R-HSA-162791	Attachment of GPI anchor to uPAR	The mature form of urokinase plasminogen activator receptor (uPAR) is attached to the plasma membrane by a glycosylphosphatidylinositol (GPI) anchor (Ploug et al. 1991). As nascent uPAR polypeptide moves into the lumen of the endoplasmic reticulum, it is attacked by a transamidase complex that cleaves the uPAR polypeptide after residue 305, releasing the carboxyterminal peptide of uPAR and replacing it with an acylated GPI moiety. In a second step, the GPI moiety is deacylated, yielding a uPAR-GPI conjugate that can be efficiently transported to the Golgi apparatus. This transport process and the other events needed to generate fully glycosylated uPAR-GPI associated with the plasma membrane will be annotated in a future release of Reactome.
R-HSA-3371568	Attenuation phase	Attenuation of the heat shock transcriptional response occurs during continuous exposure to intermediate heat shock conditions or upon recovery from stress (Abravaya et al. 1991). The attenuation phase of HSF1 cycle involves the transcriptional silencing of HSF1 bound to HSE, the release of HSF1 trimers from HSE and dissociation of HSF1 trimers to monomers. HSF1-driven heat stress associated transcription was shown to depend on inducible and reversible acetylation of HSF1 at Lys80, which negatively regulates DNA binding activity of HSF1 (Westerheide SD et al. 2009). In addition, the attenuation of HSF1 activation takes place when enough HSP70/HSP40 is produced to saturate exposed hydrophobic regions of proteins damaged as a result of heat exposure. The excess HSP70/HSP40 binds to HSF1 trimer, which leads to its dissociation from the promoter and conversion to the inactive monomeric form (Abravaya et al. 1991; Shi Y et al. 1998). Interaction of HSP70 with the transcriptional corepressor repressor element 1-silencing transcription factor corepressor (CoREST) assists in terminating heat-shock response (Gomez AV et al. 2008). HSF1 DNA-binding and transactivation activity were also inhibited upon interaction of HSF1-binding protein (HSBP1) with active trimeric HSF1(Satyal SH et al. 1998). 
R-HSA-450408	AUF1 (hnRNP D0) binds and destabilizes mRNA	AUF1 (hnRNP D0) dimers bind U-rich regions of AU-rich elements (AREs) in the 3' untranslated regions of mRNAs. The binding causes AUF1 dimers to assemble into higher order tetrameric complexes. Diphosphorylated AUF1 bound to RNA recruits additional proteins, including eIF4G, polyA-binding protein, Hsp, Hsc70, Hsp27, NSEP-1, NSAP-1, and IMP-2 which target the mRNA and AUF1 for degradation. Unphosphorylated AUF1 is thought to be less able to recruit additional proteins. AUF1 also interacts directly or indirectly with HuR and the RNA-induced silencing complex (RISC).<br>AUF1 complexed with RNA and other proteins is ubiquitinated and targeted for destruction by the proteasome while the bound mRNA is degraded. Inhibition of ubiquitin addition to AUF1 blocks mRNA degradation. The mechanism by which ubiquitin-dependent proteolysis is coupled to mRNA degradation is unknown.<br>At least 4 isoforms of AUF1 exist: p45 (45 kDa) contains all exons, p42 lacks exon 2, p40 lacks exon 7, and p37 lacks exons 2 and 7. The presence of exon 7 in p42 and p45 seems to block ubiquitination while the absence of exon 7 (p37 and p40) targets AUF1 for ubiquitination and destabilizes bound RNAs. Lack of exon 2 (p37 and p42) is associated with higher affinity for RNA and 14-3-3sigma (SFN).<br>AUF1 binds and destabilizes mRNAs encoding Interleukin-1 beta (IL1B), Tumor Necrosis Factor alpha (TNFA), Cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor 1 (CDNK1A, p21), Cyclin-D1 (CCND1), Granulocyte-macrophage colony stimulating factor (GM-CSF, CSF2), inducible Nitric oxide synthase (iNOS, NOS2), Proto-oncogene cFos (FOS), Myc proto-oncogene (MYC), Apoptosis regulator Bcl-2 (BCL2). 
R-HSA-174084	Autodegradation of Cdh1 by Cdh1:APC/C	 Cdh1 is degraded by the APC/C during in G1 and G0. This auto-regulation may contribute to reducing the levels of Cdh1 levels during G1 and G0 (Listovsky et al., 2004).
R-HSA-349425	Autodegradation of the E3 ubiquitin ligase COP1	COP1 is one of several E3 ubiquitin ligases responsible for the tight regulation of p53 abundance. Following DNA damage, COP1 dissociates from p53 and is inactivated by autodegradation via a pathway involving ATM phosphorylation of COP1 on Ser(387), autoubiquitination and proteasome mediated degradation. Destruction of COP1 results in abrogation of the ubiquitination and degradation of p53 (Dornan et al., 2006).
R-HSA-177539	Autointegration results in viral DNA circles	In this pathway, the viral integration machinery uses a site within the viral DNA as an integration target. This results in a covalent rearrangment of the viral DNA. The resulting DNA forms are not substrates for integration.<br>It has been suggested that the cellular BAF protein binds to viral DNA and diminishes autointegration by coating and condensing the viral DNA, thereby making it a less efficient integration target.<br>
R-HSA-5467340	AXIN missense mutants destabilize the destruction complex	Alterations in AXIN1 have been detected in a number of different cancers including liver and colorectal cancer and medullablastoma, among others (reviewed in Salahshor and Woodgett, 2005). Missense and nonsense mutations that disrupt or remove protein-protein interaction domains are common, and AXIN variants in cancers tend to disrupt the formation of a functional destruction complex (Satoh et al, 2000; Taniguchi et al, 2002; Webster et al, 2000; Shimizu et al, 2002).
R-HSA-4839735	AXIN mutants destabilize the destruction complex, activating WNT signaling	AXIN1 and AXIN2 are critical scaffolding proteins of the beta-catenin destruction complex and make protein-protein interactions with several of the other complex components including APC, GSK3, CK1 and beta-catenin itself through specific domains (reviewed in Saito-Diaz et al, 2013). Because of its role in promoting the degradation of beta-catenin and thereby restricting WNT signaling, AXIN1 is regarded as a tumor suppressor; consistent with this, biallelic mutations in AXIN1 that abrogate its expression or result in the production of truncated proteins have been identified in some human cancers, notably in hepatocellular and colorectal carcinomas and medullobalstoma (Satoh et al, 2000; Taniguchi et al, 2002; Shimizu et al, 2002; Dahmen et al, 2001; reviewed in Salahshor and Woodgett, 2005).
R-HSA-422475	Axon guidance	Axon guidance / axon pathfinding is the process by which neurons send out axons to reach the correct targets. Growing axons have a highly motile structure at the growing tip called the growth cone, which senses the guidance cues in the environment through guidance cue receptors and responds by undergoing cytoskeletal changes that determine the direction of axon growth. <br>Guidance cues present in the surrounding environment provide the necessary directional information for the trip. These extrinsic cues have been divided into attractive or repulsive signals that tell the growth cone where and where not to grow. <br>Genetic and biochemical studies have led to the identification of highly conserved families of guidance molecules and their receptors that guide axons. These include netrins, Slits, semaphorins, and ephrins, and their cognate receptors, DCC and or uncoordinated-5 (UNC5), roundabouts (Robo), neuropilin and Eph. In addition, many other classes of adhesion molecules are also used by growth cones to navigate properly which include NCAM and L1CAM.
R-HSA-193634	Axonal growth inhibition (RHOA activation)	p75NTR can also form a receptor complex with the Nogo receptor (NgR). Such complexes mediates axonal outgrowth inhibitory signals of MDGIs (myelin-derived growth-inhibitors), such as Nogo66, myelin-associated glycoprotein (MAG), and oligodendrocyte myelin glycoprotein (OMGP).
R-HSA-209563	Axonal growth stimulation	Complex formation between p75NTR and RHOA can leads to inhibition of RHOA activity and axonal growth.
R-HSA-73884	Base Excision Repair	Of the three major pathways involved in the repair of nucleotide damage in DNA, base excision repair (BER) involves the greatest number of individual enzymatic activities. This is the consequence of the numerous individual glycosylases, each of which recognizes and removes a specific modified base(s) from DNA. BER is responsible for the repair of the most prevalent types of DNA lesions, oxidatively damaged DNA bases, which arise as a consequence of reactive oxygen species generated by normal mitochondrial metabolism or by oxidative free radicals resulting from ionizing radiation, lipid peroxidation or activated phagocytic cells. BER is a two-step process initiated by one of the DNA glycosylases that recognizes a specific modified base(s) and removes that base through the catalytic cleavage of the glycosydic bond, leaving an abasic site without disruption of the phosphate-sugar DNA backbone. Subsequently, abasic sites are resolved by a series of enzymes that cleave the backbone, insert the replacement residue(s), and ligate the DNA strand. BER may occur by either a single-nucleotide replacement pathway or a multiple-nucleotide patch replacement pathway, depending on the structure of the terminal sugar phosphate residue. The glycosylases found in human cells recognize "foreign adducts" and not standard functional modifications such as DNA methylation (Lindahl and Wood 1999, Sokhansanj et al. 2002).
R-HSA-73929	Base-Excision Repair, AP Site Formation	Base excision repair is initiated by DNA glycosylases that hydrolytically cleave the base-deoxyribose glycosyl bond of a damaged nucleotide residue, releasing the damaged base (Lindahl and Wood 1999, Sokhansanj et al. 2002).
R-HSA-210991	Basigin interactions	Basigin is a widely expressed transmembrane glycoprotein that belongs to the Ig superfamily and is highly enriched on the surface of epithelial cells. Basigin is involved in intercellular interactions involved in various immunologic phenomena, differentiation, and development, but a major function of basigin is stimulation of synthesis of several matrix metalloproteinases. Basigin also induces angiogenesis via stimulation of VEGF production.<br>Basigin has an extracellular region with two Ig-like domains of which the N-term Ig-like domain is involved in interactions. It undergoes interactions between basigin molecules on opposing cells or on neighbouring cells. It also interacts with a variety of other proteins like caveolin-1, cyclophilins, integrins and annexin II that play important roles in cell proliferation, energy metabolism, migration, adhesion and motion, especially in cancer metastasis.
R-HSA-5620922	BBSome-mediated cargo-targeting to cilium	The BBSome is a stable complex consisting of 7 Bardet-Biedl proteins (BBS1, 2, 4, 5, 7, 8 and 9) and BBIP10 that has roles in promoting IFT and trafficking proteins to the cilum (Blacque et al, 2004; Nachury et al, 2007; Loktev et al, 2008; Jin et al, 2010; reviewed in Sung and Leroux 2013). The BBSome is the primary effector of ARL6/BBS3, a small GTPase that binds the BBSome in complex with associated membrane proteins that are destined for the ciliary membrane (Jin et al, 2010; Nachury et al, 2007; Zhang et al, 2011; Seo et al, 2011). Components of the BBSome are enriched in TPR and beta-propeller motifs and are thought to form a linear coat on membranes that functions with ARL6 to target proteins to the cilium (Jin et al, 2010; reviewed in Nachury et al, 2010).
R-HSA-1461957	Beta defensins	Humans have 38 beta-defensin genes plus 9-10 pseudogenes (details available on the HGNC website at http://www.genenames.org/genefamilies/DEFB). Many beta-defensins are encoded by recently duplicated genes giving rise to identical transcripts. Nomenclature is confusing and currently in transition. Uniprot recommended names are used throughout this pathway.<br>Many beta-defensins show expression that correlates with infection (Sahl et al. 2005, Pazgier et al. 2006). All so far characterized beta-defensins, i.e. beta-defensin 1 (hBD1), 4A (hBD2), 103 (hBD3), 104 (hBD4), 106 (hBD6), 118 (hBD18) and 128 (hBD28) have antimicrobial properties (Pazgier et al. 2006). For beta-defensins 4A, 103 and 118 (hBD2, 3, and 18) this has been shown to correlate with membrane permeabilization effects (Antcheva et al. 2004, Sahl et al. 2005, Yenugu et al. 2004). Electrostatic interaction and disruption of microbial membranes is widely believed to the primary mechanism of action for beta-defensins. Two models explain how membrane disruption takes place, the 'pore model' which postulates that beta-defensins form transmembrane pores in a similar manner to alpha-defensins, and the 'carpet model', which suggests that beta-defensins act as detergents. Beta-defensins contain 6 conserved cysteine residues that in beta-defensins 1, 4A and 103 (hBD1-3) are experimentally confirmed to be cross-linked 1-5, 2-4, 3-6. The canonical sequence for beta-defensins is x2-10Cx5-6(G/A)xCX3-4Cx9-13Cx4-7CCxn. Structurally they are similar to alpha-defensins but with much shorter pre-regions. Though dimerization of some beta-defensins has been reported this is not the case for all and it is unclear whether it is required for function. The majority of functional studies have focused on beta-defensin 103 (hBD3), which has the most significant antimicrobial activity at physiological salt concentrations (Harder et al. 2001). Beta-defensin 103 is highly cationic with a net charge of +11 e0. It exhibits broad-spectrum antimicrobial activity against gram-positive bacteria and some gram-negative bacteria (Harder et al. 2001), though some species are highly resistant (Sahly et al. 2003). Sensitivity correlates with lipid composition of the membrane, with more negatively-charged lipids correlating with larger beta-defensin 103-induced changes in membrane capacitance (Bohling et al. 2006). Though membrane disruption is widely believed to be the primary mechanism of action of beta-defensins they have other antimicrobial properties, such as inhibition of cell wall biosynthesis (Sass et al. 2010), and chemoattractant effects (Yang et al. 1999, Niyonsaba et al. 2002, 2004). The chemotactic activity of beta-defensins 1, 4A and 103 (hBD1-3) for memory T cells and immature DCs is mediated through binding to the chemokine receptor CCR6 and probably another unidentified Gi-coupled receptor (Yang et al. 1999, 2000). <br> <br>Like defensins, the human cathelicidin LL37 peptide is rich in positively-charged residues (Lehrer & Ganz 2002).<br>Expression of certain beta-defensins can be induced in response to various signals, such as bacteria, pathogen-associated molecular patterns (PAMPs), or proinflammatory cytokines (Ganz 2003, Yang et al. 2004). Like the alpha-defensins, copy number variation has been reported for DEFB4, DEFB103 and DEFB104 with individuals having 2-12 copies per diploid genome. In contrast DEFB1 does not show such variation but exhibits a number of SNPs (Hollox et al. 2003, Linzmier & Ganz 2005).
R-HSA-77352	Beta oxidation of butanoyl-CoA to acetyl-CoA	The seventh and final pass through the beta-oxidation spiral picks up where the last left off with the saturated fatty acid butanoyl-CoA and at the third step produces acetoacetyl-CoA, which can be used to generate 2 acetyl-CoA molecules or can be turned toward the synthesis of ketone bodies pathway. Four enzymatic steps are required starting with SCAD CoA dehydrogenase (Short Chain) activity, followed by the enoyl-CoA hydratase activity of crotonase, the 3-hydroxyacyl-CoA dehydrogenase activity of the short chain 3-hydroxyacyl-CoA dehydrogenase (SCHAD). The final enzymatic step, creating two acetyl-CoA molecules requires a specific ketoacyl-CoA thiolase, Acetoacetyl-CoA thiolase.
R-HSA-77346	Beta oxidation of decanoyl-CoA to octanoyl-CoA-CoA	The fourth pass through the beta-oxidation spiral picks up where the last left off with the saturated fatty acid decanoyl-CoA and produces octanoyl-CoA. Four enzymatic steps are required starting with MCAD CoA dehydrogenase (Medium Chain) activity, followed by the enoyl-CoA hydratase activity of crotonase, the 3-hydroxyacyl-CoA dehydrogenase activity of the short chain 3-hydroxyacyl-CoA dehydrogenase (SCHAD), and completed by the ketoacyl-CoA thiolase activity, present in the mitochondrial membrane associated trifunctional protein. Note that the 3-hydroxyacyl-CoA dehydrogenase activity of SCHAD is not actually limited to short chain fatty acids, in fact SCHAD has a broad substrate specificity.
R-HSA-77350	Beta oxidation of hexanoyl-CoA to butanoyl-CoA	The sixth pass through the beta-oxidation spiral picks up where the last left off with the saturated fatty acid hexanoyl-CoA and produces butanoyl-CoA. Four enzymatic steps are required starting with SCAD CoA dehydrogenase (Short Chain) activity, followed by the enoyl-CoA hydratase activity of crotonase, the 3-hydroxyacyl-CoA dehydrogenase activity of the short chain 3-hydroxyacyl-CoA dehydrogenase (SCHAD), and completed by the ketoacyl-CoA thiolase activity, present in the mitochondrial membrane associated trifunctional protein.
R-HSA-77310	Beta oxidation of lauroyl-CoA to decanoyl-CoA-CoA	The third pass through the beta-oxidation spiral picks up where the last left off with the saturated fatty acid lauroyl-CoA and produces decanoyl-CoA. Four enzymatic steps are required starting with LCAD CoA dehydrogenase (Long Chain) activity, followed by the enoyl-CoA hydratase activity of crotonase, the 3-hydroxyacyl-CoA dehydrogenase activity of the short chain 3-hydroxyacyl-CoA dehydrogenase (SCHAD), and completed by the ketoacyl-CoA thiolase activity, present in the mitochondrial membrane associated trifunctional protein. Note that the 3-hydroxyacyl-CoA dehydrogenase activity of SCHAD is not actually limited to short chain fatty acids, in fact SCHAD has a broad substrate specificity.
R-HSA-77285	Beta oxidation of myristoyl-CoA to lauroyl-CoA	The second pass through the beta-oxidation spiral starts with the saturated fatty acid myristoyl-CoA (from the first swing through the beta oxidation spiral) and produces lauroyl-CoA. Four enzymatic steps are required starting with LCAD CoA dehydrogenase (Long Chain) activity, followed by three enzymatic steps, enoyl-CoA hydratase, 3-hydroxyacyl-CoA dehydrogenase, and ketoacyl-CoA thiolase activities, all present in the mitochondrial membrane associated trifunctional protein.
R-HSA-77348	Beta oxidation of octanoyl-CoA to hexanoyl-CoA	The fifth pass through the beta-oxidation spiral picks up where the last left off with the saturated fatty acid octanoyl-CoA and produces hexanoyl-CoA. Four enzymatic steps are required starting with MCAD CoA dehydrogenase (Medium Chain) activity, followed by the enoyl-CoA hydratase activity of crotonase, the 3-hydroxyacyl-CoA dehydrogenase activity of the short chain 3-hydroxyacyl-CoA dehydrogenase (SCHAD), and completed by the ketoacyl-CoA thiolase activity, present in the mitochondrial membrane associated trifunctional protein.
R-HSA-77305	Beta oxidation of palmitoyl-CoA to myristoyl-CoA	This first pass through the beta-oxidation spiral starts with the saturated fatty acid palmitoyl-CoA and produces myristoyl-CoA. Four enzymatic steps are required, starting with VLCAD CoA dehydrogenase (Very Long Chain) activity, followed by three enzymatic steps, enoyl-CoA hydratase, 3-hydroxyacyl-CoA dehydrogenase, and ketoacyl-CoA thiolase activities, all present in the mitochondrial membrane associated trifunctional protein.
R-HSA-3858494	Beta-catenin independent WNT signaling	Humans and mice have 19 identified WNT proteins that were originally classified as either 'canonical' or 'non-canonical' depending upon whether they were able to transform the mouse mammary epithelial cell line C57MG and to induce secondary axis formation in Xenopus (Wong et al, 1994; Du et al, 1995). So-called canonical WNTs, including Wnt1, 3, 3a and 7, initiate signaling pathways that destabilize the destruction complex and allow beta-catenin to accumulate and translocate to the nucleus where it promotes transcription (reviewed in Saito-Diaz et al, 2013). Non-canonical WNTs, including Wnt 2, 4, 5a, 5b, 6, 7b, and Wnt11 activate beta-catenin-independent responses that regulate many aspects of morphogenesis and development, often by impinging on the cytoskeleton (reviewed in van Amerongen, 2012). Two of the main beta-catenin-independent pathways are the Planar Cell Polarity (PCP) pathway, which controls the establishment of polarity in the plane of a field of cells, and the WNT/Ca2+ pathway, which promotes the release of intracellular calcium and regulates numerous downstream effectors (reviewed in Gao, 2012; De, 2011).
R-HSA-196299	Beta-catenin phosphorylation cascade	Degradation of beta-catenin is initiated following amino-terminal serine/threonine phosphorylation. Phosphorylation of B-catenin at S45 by CK1 alpha primes the subsequent sequential GSK-3-mediated phosphorylation at Thr41, Ser37 and Ser33 (Amit et al., 2002 ; Lui et al., 2002).
R-HSA-389887	Beta-oxidation of pristanoyl-CoA	Pristanoyl-CoA, generated in the peroxisome by alpha-oxidation of dietary phytanic acid, is further catabolized by three cycles of peroxisomal beta-oxidation to yield 4,8-dimethylnonanoyl-CoA, acetyl-CoA and two molecules of propionyl-CoA. These molecules in turn are converted to carnitine conjugates, which can be transported to mitochondria (Wanders and Waterham 2006, Verhoeven et al. 1998, Ferdinandusse et al. 1999).
R-HSA-390247	Beta-oxidation of very long chain fatty acids	Linear fatty acids containing more than 18 carbons are broken down by beta-oxidation in peroxisomes to yield acetyl-CoA and medium chain-length fatty acyl CoA's such as octanoyl-CoA (Wanders and Waterham 2006).
R-HSA-1307965	betaKlotho-mediated ligand binding	FGF21 and FGF19 require betaKlotho for efficient signaling through FGFR1c and FGFR3c. betaKlotho does not interact with 'b' receptor isoforms, and only weakly with FGFR2c. In addition, FGF19, but not FGF21, signals through FGFR4 in a betaKlotho-dependent fashion
R-HSA-425381	Bicarbonate transporters	Respiratory oxidation in the mitochondria produces carbon dioxide (CO2) as a waste product. CO2 is in equilibrium with bicarbonate (HCO3-) and is the body's central pH buffering system. HCO3- is charged so cannot move across membranes unaided. The bicarbonate transport proteins move bicarbonate across the membrane. There are 14 genes which encode these transport proteins in mammals. Applying the Human Genome Organization's sytematic nomenclature to human genes, the bicarbonate transporters belong to the SLC4A and SLC26A families. Within SLC4A, there are two distinct subfamilies, functionally corresponding to the electroneutral Cl-/HCO3- exchangers and Na+-coupled HCO3- co-transporters (Romero MF et al, 2004; Cordat E and Casey JR, 2009). 
R-HSA-194068	Bile acid and bile salt metabolism	In a healthy adult human, about 500 mg of cholesterol is converted to bile salts daily. Newly synthesized bile salts are secreted into the bile and released into the small intestine where they emulsify dietary fats (Russell 2003). About 95% of the bile salts in the intestine are recovered and returned to the liver (Kullak-Ublick et al. 2004; Trauner and Boyer 2002). The major pathway for bile salt synthesis in the liver begins with the conversion of cholesterol to 7alpha-hydroxycholesterol. Bile salt synthesis can also begin with the synthesis of an oxysterol - 24-hydroxycholesterol or 27-hydroxycholesterol. In the body, the initial steps of these two pathways occur in extrahepatic tissues, generating intermediates that are transported to the liver and converted to bile salts via the 7alpha-hydroxycholesterol pathway. These extrahepatic pathways contribute little to the total synthesis of bile salts, but are thought to play important roles in extrahepatic cholesterol homeostasis (Javitt 2002).
R-HSA-425471	Bile salt and organic anion SLC transporters	Four SLC gene families encode proteins that mediate the transport of bile salts and organic anions; SLC10, SLC13, SLC16 and SLC47 (He L et al, 2009).
R-HSA-173107	Binding and entry of HIV virion	HIV enters cells by fusion at the cell surface, that results in a productive infection. The envelope (Env) protein of HIV mediates entry. Env is composed of a surface subunit, gp120, and a transmembrane subunit, gp41, which assemble as heterotrimers on the virion surface.The trimeric, surface gp120 protein (SU) on the virion engages CD4 on the host cell, inducing conformational changes that promote binding to select chemokine receptors CCR5 and CXCR4.<br>The sequential interplay between SU, CD4 and chemokine coreceptors prompts a conformational change in the transmembrane gp41. This coiled coil protein, assembled as a trimer on the virion membrane, springs open to project three peptide fusion domains that 'harpoon' the lipid bilayer of the target cell. A hairpin structure (also referred to as a "coiled coil bundle") is subsequently formed when the extracellular portion of gp41 collapses, and this hairpin formation promotes the fusion of virion and target cell membranes by bringing them into close proximity. Virion and target cell membrane fusion leads to the release of HIV viral cores into the cell interior.<br>
R-HSA-2173782	Binding and Uptake of Ligands by Scavenger Receptors	Scavenger receptors bind free extracellular ligands as the initial step in clearance of the ligands from the body (reviewed in Ascenzi et al. 2005, Areschoug and Gordon 2009, Nielsen et al. 2010). Some scavenger receptors, such as the CD163-haptoglobin system, are specific for only one ligand. Others, such as the SCARA receptors (SR-A receptors) are less specific, binding several ligands which share a common property, such as polyanionic charges.<br>Brown and Goldstein originated the idea of receptors dedicated to scavenging aberrant molecules such as modified low density lipoprotein particles (Goldstein et al. 1979) and such receptors have been shown to participate in pathological processes such as atherosclerosis. Based on homology, scavenger receptors have been categorized into classes A-H (reviewed in Murphy et al. 2005).
R-HSA-4411364	Binding of TCF/LEF:CTNNB1 to target gene promoters	The genes regulated by beta-catenin and TCF/LEF are involved in a diverse range of functions in cellular proliferation, differentiation, embryogenesis and tissue homeostasis, and include transcription factors, cell cycle regulators, growth factors, proteinases and inflammatory cytokines, among others (reviewed in Vlad et al, 2008). A number of WNT signaling components are themselves positively or negatively regulated targets of TCF/LEF-dependent transcription, establishing feedback loops to enhance or restrict signaling (see for instance, Khan et al 2007; Chamorro et al, 2005; Roose et al, 1999; Lustig et al, 2002). Other than a few of these general feedback targets (e.g. Axin2), most target genes are cell- and/or tissue-specific. A list of WNT/beta-catenin-dependent target genes is maintained at http://www.standford.edu/group/nusselab/cgi-bin/wnt/target_genes. 
R-HSA-141333	Biogenic amines are oxidatively deaminated to aldehydes by MAOA and MAOB	Human monoamine oxidases (MAOs) are flavin-containing enzymes that are present on the outer mitochondrial membrane and act on primary, secondary and tertiary amines. In contrast to the P450s which have a large number of isozymes, MAOs number only two isozymes, MAO-A and MAO-B. These gene products share over 70% sequence identity, are approximately 59KDa in size and have overlapping substrates (for example dopamine, tryamine and tryptamine) but each form also has distinct substrate specificities. MAO-A (primary type in fibroblasts) preferentially oxidises serotonin (5-Hydroxytryptamine) whereas MAO-B (primary type in platelets) prefers phenylethylamine. MAOs are of particular clinical interest because of the use of MAO inhibitors (MAOI) as antidepressants or in the treatment of neurodegenerative diseases Benedetti 2001, Beedham 1997).
R-HSA-211859	Biological oxidations	All organisms are constantly exposed to foreign chemicals every day. These can be man-made (drugs, industrial chemicals) or natural (alkaloids, toxins from plants and animals). Uptake is usually via ingestion but inhalation and transdermal routes are also common.<p><p>The very nature of many chemicals that make them suitable for uptake by these routes, in other words their lipophilicty (favours fat solubility) is also the main reason organisms have developed mechanisms that convert them to hydrophilic (favours water solubility) compounds which are readily excreted via bile and urine. Otherwise, lipophilic chemicals would accumulate in the body and overwhelm defense mechanisms. This process is called <b><i>biotransformation</i></b> and is catalyzed by enzymes mainly in the liver of higher organisms but a number of other organs have considerable ability to process xenobiotica such as kidneys, gut and lungs. As well as xenobiotics, many endogenous compounds are commonly eliminated by this process.<p><p>This mechanism is of ancient origin and a major factor for its development in animals is plants. Most animals are plant eaters and thus are subject to a huge variety of chemical compounds which plants produce to stop themselves being eaten. This complex set of enzymes have several features which make them ideal for biotransformation;<p><p><i>(<b>1</b>) metabolites of the parent chemical are usually made more water soluble so it favours rapid excretion via bile and urine</i><p><p><i>(<b>2</b>) the enzymes possess broad and overlapping specificity to be able to deal with newly exposed chemicals</i><p><p><i>(<b>3</b>) metabolites of the parent generally don't have adverse biological effects.</i><p><p>In the real world however, all these criteria have exceptions. Many chemicals are transformed into reactive metabolites. In pharmacology, the metabolites of some parent drugs exert the desired pharmacological effect but in the case of polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs), which can undergo epoxidation, it results in the formation of an electrophile which can attack proteins and DNA.<p><p>Metabolism of xenobiotica occurs in several steps called <i><b>Phase 1 (functionalization)</b></i> and <i><b>Phase 2 (conjugation)</b></i>. To improve water solubility, a functional group is added to or exposed on the chemical in one or more steps (Phase 1) to which hydrophilic conjugating species can be added (Phase 2). Functional groups can either be electrophilic (epoxides, carbonyl groups) or nucleophilic (hydroxyls, amino and sulfhydryl groups, carboxylic groups) <i>(see picture)</i>.<p><p>Once chemicals undergo functionalization, the electrophilic or nucleophilic species can be detrimental to biological systems. Electrophiles can react with electron-rich macromolecules such as proteins, DNA and RNA by covalent interaction whilst nucleophiles have the potential to interact with biological receptors. That's why conjugation is so important as it mops up these potentially reactive species.<p><p>Many chemicals, when exposed to certain metabolizing enzymes can induce those enzymes, a process called <i><b>enzyme induction</b></i>. The effect of this is that these chemicals accelerate their own biotransformation and excretion. The reverse is also true where some chemicals cause enzyme inhibition. Some other factors that alter enzyme levels are sex, age and genetic predisposition. Between species, there can be considerable differences in biotransformation ability which is a problem faced by drug researchers interpreting toxicological results to humans.
R-HSA-2466712	Biosynthesis of A2E, implicated in retinal degradation	Lipofuscin is a yellow-brown pigment grain composed mainly of lipids but also sugars and certain metals. Accumulation of lipofuscin is associated with degenerative diseases such as Alzheimer's disease, Parkinson's disease, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease and retinal macular degeneration.<br><br>A prominent component of lipofuscin in retinal pigment epithelial (RPE) cells is the bisretinoid A2E (di-retinoid-pyridinium-ethanolamine), the end-product of the condensation of 2 molecules of all-trans-retinal (atRAL) and phosphatidylethanolamine (PE) in photoreceptor outer disc membranes. Once formed, A2E is phagocytosed, together with outer segments (Kevany & Palczewski 2010), to RPE where it accumulates. There is no evidence as yet to indicate that A2E can be catabolised (Sparrow et al. 2012, Sparrow et al. 2010). A simplified biosynthetic pathway for A2E is described here.
R-HSA-446193	Biosynthesis of the N-glycan precursor (dolichol lipid-linked oligosaccharide, LLO) and transfer to a nascent protein	N-linked glycosylation commences with the 14-step synthesis of a dolichol lipid-linked oligosaccharide (LLO) consisting of 14 sugars (2 core GlcNAcs, 9 mannoses and 3 terminal GlcNAcs). This pathway is highly conserved in eukaryotes, and a closely related pathway is found in many eubacteria and Archaea. Mutations in the genes associated with N-glycan precursor synthesis lead to a diverse group of disorders collectively known as Congenital Disorders of Glycosylation (type I and II) (Sparks et al. 1993). The phenotypes of these disorders reflect the important role that N-glycosylation has during development, controlling the folding and the properties of proteins in the secretory pathway, and proteins that mediate cell-to-cell interactions or timing of development.
R-HSA-196780	Biotin transport and metabolism	Biotin (Btn) is an essential cofactor in a variety of carboxylation reactions (Zempleni et al. 2009). Humans cannot synthesize Btn but it is abundant in the human diet and can be taken up from the intestinal lumen by the SLC5A6 transporter. Its uptake, intracellular translocation, covalent conjugation to apoenzymes, and salvage are described here.
R-HSA-1368108	BMAL1:CLOCK,NPAS2 activates circadian gene expression	As inferred from mouse, BMAL1:CLOCK (ARNTL:CLOCK) and BMAL1:NPAS2 (ARNTL:NPAS2) heterodimers bind to sequence elements (E boxes) in the promoters of target genes and enhance transcription (Gekakis et al. 1998, reviewed in Munoz and Baler 2003).
R-HSA-70895	Branched-chain amino acid catabolism	The branched-chain amino acids, leucine, isoleucine, and valine, are all essential amino acids (i.e., ones required in the diet). They are major constituents of muscle protein. The breakdown of these amino acids starts with two common steps catalyzed by enzymes that act on all three amino acids: reversible transamination by branched-chain amino acid aminotransferase, and irreversible oxidative decarboxylation by the branched-chain ketoacid dehydrogenase complex. Isovaleryl-CoA is produced from leucine by these two reactions, alpha-methylbutyryl-CoA from isoleucine, and isobutyryl-CoA from valine. These acyl-CoA's undergo dehydrogenation, catalyzed by three different but related enzymes, and the breakdown pathways then diverge. Leucine is ultimately converted to acetyl-CoA and acetoacetate; isoleucine to acetyl-CoA and succinyl-CoA; and valine to succinyl-CoA. Under fasting conditions, substantial amounts of all three amino acids are generated by protein breakdown. In muscle, the final products of leucine, isoleucine, and valine catabolism can be fully oxidized via the citric acid cycle; in liver they can be directed toward the synthesis of ketone bodies (acetoacetate and acetyl-CoA) and glucose (succinyl-CoA) (Chuang & Shih 2001, Sweetman & Williams 2001).
R-HSA-352238	Breakdown of the nuclear lamina	Activated caspases cleave nuclear lamins causing the irreversible breakdown of the nuclear lamina.
R-HSA-168302	Budding	The process by which influenza virus particles bud from an infected cell is not very well understood. Accumulation of M1 at the inner leaflet of the plasma membrane is thought to be the trigger for the initiation of bud formation. This bud formation continues until the inner core of the virus is completely enveloped. Completion of the budding process requires the membrane at the base of the bud to fuse. Although M1 is thought to be the driving force for bud formation, other viral and cellular proteins have been demonstrated to affect size and shape of the virus particle. Generally, influenza virus particles are either spherical or filamentous and this characteristic morphology is genetically linked to the M segment (Bourmakina, 2003; Roberts, 1998). Host factors such as polarization and the actin cytoskeleton play a critical role in determining the shape of filamentous particles (Roberts, 1998; Simpson-Holley, 2002).
R-HSA-162588	Budding and maturation of HIV virion	With the virus components precariously assembled on the inner leaflet of the plasma membrane, the host cell machinery is required for viral budding. The virus takes advantage of the host ESCRT pathway to terminate Gag polymerization and catalyze release. The ESCRT pathway is normally responsible for membrane fission that creates cytoplasm filled vesicular bodies. In this case HIV (and other viruses) take advantage of the ESCRT cellular machinery to facilitate virion budding from the host.
R-HSA-450385	Butyrate Response Factor 1 (BRF1) binds and destabilizes mRNA	Butyrate Response Factor 1 (BRF1, ZFP36L1, not to be confused with transcription factor IIIB) binds AU-rich elements in the 3' region of mRNAs. After binding, BRF1 recruits exonucleases (XRN1 and the exosome) and decapping enzymes (DCP1a and DCP2) to hydrolyze the RNA. The ability of BRF1 to direct RNA degradation is controlled by phosphorylation of BRF1. Protein kinase B/AKT1 phosphorylates BRF1 at serines 92 and 203. Phosphorylated BRF1 can still bind RNA but is sequestered by binding 14-3-3 protein, preventing BRF1 from destabilizing RNA. BRF1 is also phosphorylated by MK2 at serines 54, 92, 203, and at an unknown site in the C-terminus. It is unknown if this particular phosphorylated form of BRF1 binds 14-3-3.
R-HSA-191647	c-src mediated regulation of Cx43 function and closure of gap junctions	The kinases c-Src (Giepmans et al. 2001; Sorgen et al. 2004), PKc (Lin et al. 2003) and MAPK (Mograbi et al. 2003) play an essential role in the phosphorylation of Cx which leads to its degradation. c-Src appears to associate with and phosphorylate Cx43 leading to closure of gap junctions. Evidence suggests that v-src may activate MAPK, which in turn phosphorylates Cx43 on serine sites leading to channel gating (Zhou et al. 1999).
R-HSA-5621481	C-type lectin receptors (CLRs)	Pathogen recognition is central to the induction of T cell differentiation. Groups of pathogens share similar structures known as pathogen-associated molecular patterns (PAMPs), which are recognised by pattern recognition receptors (PRRs) expressed on dendritic cells (DCs) to induce cytokine expression. PRRs include archetypical Toll-like receptors (TLRs) and non-TLRs such as retinoic acid-inducible gene I (RIG-I)-like receptors, C-type lectin receptors (CLRs) and intracellular nucleotide-binding domain and leucine-rich-repeat-containing family (NLRs). PRR recognition of PAMPs can lead to the activation of intracellular signalling pathways that elicit innate responses against pathogens and direct the development of adaptive immunity.<br>CLRs comprises a large family of receptors which bind carbohydrates, through one or more carbohydrate recognition domains (CRDs), or which possess structurally similar C-type lectin-like domains (CTLDs) which do not necessarily recognise carbohydrate ligands. Some CLRs can induce signalling pathways that directly activate nuclear factor-kB (NF-kB), whereas other CLRs affect signalling by Toll-like receptors. These signalling pathways trigger cellular responses, including phagocytosis, DC maturation, chemotaxis, the respiratory burst, inflammasome activation, and cytokine production.
R-HSA-75102	C6 deamination of adenosine	Hydrolytic deamination of adenosine leads to inosine. Ammonia is presumed to be released during this reaction.<BR>
R-HSA-111996	Ca-dependent events	Calcium, as the ion Ca2+, is essential in many biological processes. The majority of Ca2+ in many organisms is bound to phosphates which form skeletal structures and also buffer Ca2+ levels in extracellular fluids (typically 1 millimolar). Intracellular free Ca2+, by contrast, is 10,000 times lower than the outside of the cell (typically 10 micromolar). This concentration gradient is used to import Ca2+ into cells where it acts as a second messenger.
R-HSA-1296052	Ca2+ activated K+ channels	Ca2+ activated potassium channels are expressed in neuronal and non-neuronal tissue such as smooth muscle, epithelial cell and sensory cells. Ca2+ activated potassium channels are activated when the Ca2+ ion concentration increased, The efflux of K+ via these channels leads to repolarization/hyperpolarization of the membrane potential which limits the Ca2+ influx though voltage activated Ca2+ channels (VGCC) thereby regulating the influx of Ca2+ flow via VGCC.
R-HSA-4086398	Ca2+ pathway	A number of so called non-canonical WNT ligands have been shown to promote intracellular calcium release upon FZD binding. This beta-catenin-independent WNT pathway acts through heterotrimeric G proteins and promotes calcium release through phophoinositol signaling and activation of phosphodiesterase (PDE). Downstream effectors include the calcium/calmodulin-dependent kinase II (CaMK2) and PKC (reviewed in De, 2011). The WNT Ca2+ pathway is important in dorsoventral polarity, convergent extension and organ formation in vertebrates and also has roles in negatively regulating 'canonical' beta-catenin-dependent transcription. Non-canonical WNT Ca2+ signaling is also implicated in inflammatory response and cancer (reviewed in Kohn and Moon, 2005; Sugimura and Li, 2010).
R-HSA-419812	Calcitonin-like ligand receptors	The calcitonin peptide family comprises calcitonin, amylin, calcitonin gene-related peptide (CGRP), adrenomedullin (AM) and intermedin (AM2). Calcitonin is a 32 amino acid peptide, involved in bone homeostasis (Sexton PM et al, 1999). Amylin is a product of the islet beta-cell (Cooper GJ et al, 1987), along with insulin and probably has a hormonal role in the regulation of nutrient intake (Young A and Denaro M, 1998). Adrenomedullin (AM) is a ubiquitously expressed peptide initially isolated from phaechromocytoma (a tumour of the adrenal medulla) (Kitamura K et al, 1993). Both AM and AM2 (Takei Y et al, 2004) belong to a family of calcitonin-related peptide hormones important for regulating diverse physiologic functions and the chemical composition of fluids and tissues.<br>The receptor family for these peptides consists of two class B GPCRs, the calcitonin receptor (CT) and calcitonin receptor-like receptor (CL) (Poyner DR er al, 2002). Whilst the receptor for calcitonin is a conventional class B GPCR, the receptors for CGRP, AM and amylin require additional proteins, called the receptor activity modifying proteins (RAMPs). There are three RAMPs in mammals; they interact with the CT receptor to convert it to receptors for amylin. For CGRP and AM, the related CL interacts with RAMP1 to give a CGRP receptor and RAMP2 or 3 to give AM receptors. CL by itself will bind no known endogenous ligand.
R-HSA-111933	Calmodulin induced events	One important physiological role for Calmodulin is the regulation of adenylylcyclases. Four of the nine known adenylylcyclases are calcium sensitive, in particular type 8 (AC8).
R-HSA-901042	Calnexin/calreticulin cycle	The unfolded protein is recognized by a chaperon protein (calnexin or calreticulin) and the folding process starts. The binding of these protein requires a mono-glucosylated glycan (Caramelo JJ and Parodi AJ, 2008), but in certain cases can occur even in the absence of glycosylation (Ireland BS et al, 2008).
R-HSA-111997	CaM pathway	Calmodulin (CaM) is a small acidic protein that contains four EF-hand motifs, each of which can bind a calcium ion, therefore it can bind up to four calcium ions. The protein has two approximately symmetrical domains, separated by a flexible hinge region. Calmodulin is the prototypical example of the EF-hand family of Ca2+-sensing proteins. Changes in intracellular Ca2+ concentration regulate calmodulin in three distinct ways. First, by directing its subcellular distribution. Second, by promoting association with different target proteins. Third, by directing a variety of conformational states in calmodulin that result in target-specific activation. Calmodulin binds and activates several effector protein (e.g. the CaM-dependent adenylyl cyclases, phosphodiesterases, protein kinases and the protein phosphatase calcineurin).
R-HSA-111957	Cam-PDE 1 activation	Human Ca2+/calmodulin-dependent phosphodiesterase PDE1 is activated by the binding of calmodulin in the presence of Ca(2+). PDE1 has three subtypes PDE1A, PDE1B and PDE1C and their role is to hydrolyze both cGMP and cAMP. Their role is to antagonize the increased concentration of the intracellular second messengers determined by the synthetic activity of the adenylate cyclase enzymes thus governing intracellular cAMP dynamics in response to changes in the cytosolic Ca2+ concentration. PDE1 are mainly cytosolic but different isoforms are expressed in different tissues.
R-HSA-111932	CaMK IV-mediated phosphorylation of CREB	The Ca2+-calmodulin-dependent protein kinase (CaM kinase) cascade includes three kinases: CaM-kinase kinase (CaMKK); and the CaM kinases CaMKI and CaMKIV, which are phosphorylated and activated by CaMKK. Members of this cascade respond to elevation of intracellular Ca2+ levels. CaMKK and CaMKIV localize both to the nucleus and to the cytoplasm, whereas CaMKI is only cytosolic. Nuclear CaMKIV regulates transcription through phosphorylation of several transcription factors, including CREB. In the cytoplasm, there is extensive cross-talk between CaMKK, CaMKIV and other signaling cascades, including those that involve the cAMP-dependent kinase (PKA), MAP kinases and protein kinase B (PKB/Akt).
R-HSA-72737	Cap-dependent Translation Initiation	Translation initiation is a complex process in which the Met-tRNAi initiator, 40S, and 60S ribosomal subunits are assembled by eukaryotic initiation factors (eIFs) into an 80S ribosome at the start codon of an mRNA. The basic mechanism for this process can be described as a series of five steps: 1) formation of a pool of free 40S subunits, 2) formation of the ternary complex (Met-tRNAi/eIF2/GTP), and subsequently, the 43S complex (comprising the 40S subunit, Met-tRNAi/eIF2/GTP, eIF3 and eIF1A), 3) activation of the mRNA upon binding of the cap-binding complex eIF4F, and factors eIF4A, eIF4B and eIF4H, with subsequent binding to the 43S complex, 4) ribosomal scanning and start codon recognition, and 5) GTP hydrolysis and joining of the 60S ribosomal subunit.
R-HSA-5694530	Cargo concentration in the ER	Computational analysis suggests that ~25% of the proteome may be exported from the ER in human cells (Kanapin et al, 2003). These cargo need to be recognized and concentrated into COPII vesicles, which range in size from 60-90 nm, and which move cargo from the ER to the ERGIC in mammalian cells (reviewed in Lord et al, 2013; Szul and Sztul, 2011). Recognition of transmembrane cargo is mediated by interaction with one of the 4 isoforms of SEC24, a component of the inner COPII coat (Miller et al, 2002; Miller et al, 2003; Mossessova et al, 2003; Mancias and Goldberg, 2008). Soluble cargo in the ER lumen is concentrated into COPII vesicles through interaction with a receptor of the ERGIC-53 family, the p24 family or the ERV family. Each of these families of transmembrane receptors interact with cargo through their lumenal domains and with components of the COPII coat with their cytoplasmic domains and are packaged into the COPII vesicle along with the cargo. The receptors are subsequently recycled to the ER in COPI vesicles through retrograde traffic (reviewed in Dancourt and Barlowe, 2010). Packaging of large cargo such as fibrillar collagen depends on the transmembrane accessory factors MIA3 (also known as TANGO1) and CTAGE5. Like the ERGIC, p24 and ERV cargo receptors, MIA3 and CTAGE5 interact both with the collagen cargo and with components of the COPII coat. Unlike the other cargo receptors, however, MIA3 and CTAGE5 are not loaded into the vesicle but remain in the ER membrane (reviewed in Malhotra and Erlmann, 2011; Malhotra et al, 2015).
R-HSA-5620920	Cargo trafficking to the periciliary membrane	The primary cilium is a sensory organelle that is required for the transduction of numerous external signals such as growth factors, hormones and morphogens, and an intact primary cilium is needed for signaling pathways mediated by Hh, WNT, calcium, G-protein coupled receptors and receptor tyrosine kinases, among others (reviewed in Goetz and Anderson, 2010; Berbari et al, 2009; Nachury, 2014). Proteomic studies suggest that the cilium is home to approximately a thousand proteins, and has a unique protein and lipid make up relative to the bulk cytoplasm and plasma membrane (Pazour et al, 2005; Ishikawa et al, 2012; Ostrowoski et al, 2002; reviewed in Emmer et al, 2010; Rohatgi and Snell, 2010). In addition, the cilium is a dynamic structure, and the axoneme is continually being remodeled by addition and removal of tubulin at the distal tip (Marshall and Rosenbaum, 2001; Stephens, 1997; Song et al, 2001). As a result, the function and structure of this organelle relies on the directed trafficking of protein and vesicles to the cilium. Small GTPases of the RAS, RAB, ARF and ARL families are involved in cytoskeletal organization and membrane traffic and are required to regulate the traffic from the Golgi and the trans-Golgi network to the primary cilium (reviewed in Deretic, 2013; Li et al, 2012). ARF4 is a Golgi-resident GTPase that acts in conjunction with a ciliary-targeting complex consisting of the ARF-GAP ASAP1, RAB11A, the RAB11 effector FIP3 and the RAB8A guanine nucleotide exchange factor RAB3IP/RABIN8 to target cargo bearing a putative C-terminal VxPx targeting motif to the cilium. A well-studied example of this system involves the trafficking of rhodopsin to the retinal rod photoreceptors, a specialized form of the cilium (reviewed in Deretic, 2013). ARL3, ARL13B and ARL6 are all small ARF-like GTPases with assorted roles in ciliary trafficking and maintenance. Studies in C. elegans suggest that ARL3 and ARL13B have opposing roles in maintaining the stability of the anterograde IFT trains in the cilium (Li et al, 2010). In addition, both ARL3 and ARL13B have roles in facilitating the traffic of subsets of ciliary cargo to the cilium. Myristoylated cargo such as peripheral membrane protein Nephrocystin-3 (NPHP3) is targeted to the cilium in a UNC119- and ARL3-dependent manner, while ARL13B is required for the PDE6-dependent ciliary localization of INPP5E (Wright et al, 2011; Humbert et al, 2012; reviewed in Li et al, 2012). ARL6 was also identified as BBS3, a gene that when mutated gives rise to the ciliopathy Bardet-Biedl syndrome (BBS). ARL6 acts upstream of a complex of 8 other BBS-associated proteins known as the BBSome. ARL6 and the BBSome are required for the ciliary targeting of proteins including the melanin concentrating hormone receptor (MCHR) and the somatostatin receptor (SSTR3), among others (Nachury et al, 2007; Loktev et al, 2008; Jin et al, 2010; Zhang et al, 2011). Both the BBSome and ARL6 may continue to be associated with cargo inside the primary cilium, as they are observed to undergo typical IFT movements along the axoneme (Fan et al, 2004; Lechtreck et al, 2009; reviewed in Li et al, 2012). 
R-HSA-71262	Carnitine synthesis	Carnitine is synthesized in four steps from trimethyllysine (generated in turn by the S-adenosyl-methionine-mediated methylation of lysine residues in proteins, followed by protein hydrolysis). The enzymes that catalyze the first three steps of carnitine synthesis, converting trimethyllysine to gamma-butyrobetaine, are widely distributed in human tissues. The enzyme that catalyzes the last reaction, converting gamma-butyrobetaine to carnitine, is found only in liver and kidney cells, and at very low levels in brain tissues. Other tissues that require carnitine, such as muscle, are dependent on transport systems that mediate its export from the liver and uptake by other tissues (Kerner and Hoppel 1998).
R-HSA-5218900	CASP8 activity is inhibited	Cell death triggered by extrinsic stimuli via death receptors or toll-like receptors (e.g., TLR3, TLR4) may result in either apoptosis or regulated necrosis (necroptosis) (Holler N et al. 2000; Kalai M et al. 2002; Kaiser WJ and Offermann MK 2005; Yang P et al. 2007). Caspase-8 (CASP8) is a cysteine peptidase, which functions as a key mediator for determining which form of cell death will occur (Kalai M et al. 2002; ). The proteolytic activity of a fully processed, heterotetrameric form of CASP8 in human and rodent cells is required for proapoptotic signaling and also for a cleavage of kinases RIPK1 and RIPK3, while at the same time preventing RIPK1/RIPK3-dependent regulated necrosis (Juo P et al. 1998; Lin Y et al. 1999; Holler N et al. 2000; Hopkins-Donaldson S et al. 2000). A blockage of CASP8 activity in the presence of caspase inhibitors such as Z-VAD-FMK (pan-caspase inhibitor), endogenous FLIP(S) or viral FLIP-like protein was found to switch signaling to necrotic cell death (Thome M et al. 1997; Kalai M et al. 2002; Feoktistova M et al. 2011; Sawai H 2013).? 
R-HSA-5357769	Caspase activation via extrinsic apoptotic signalig pathway	Known as the "death receptor pathway" the extrinsic or caspase 8/10 dependent pathway is activated by ligand binding. The "death receptors" are specialized cell-surface receptors including Fas/CD95, tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-alpha) receptor 1, and two receptors, DR4 and DR5, that bind to the TNF-alpha related apoptosis-inducing ligand (TRAIL). The extrinsic and intrinsic pathways unite in the activation of Caspase-3, though the two pathways communicate through the pro-apoptotic Bcl-2 family member Bid before uniting at the shared activation of Caspase-3.
R-HSA-264870	Caspase-mediated cleavage of cytoskeletal proteins	Caspase-mediated cleavage of a number of proteins in the cortical actin network ( ) microfilament system and others involved in maintenance of the cytoskeletal architecture (vimentin, or Gas2 and plectin) may directly contribute to apoptotic changes in cell shape.
R-HSA-5661270	Catabolism of glucuronate to xylulose-5-phosphate	The conversion of D-glucuronate to D-xylulose-5-phosphate, an intermediate in the pentose phosphate pathway, proceeds via L-gulonate, 3-dehydro-L-gulonate, L-xylulose, xylitol, and D-xylulose (Wamelink et al. 2008). D-glucuronate can be generated via the degradation of glucuronidated proteins. This pathway would have the effect of returning it to the pentose phosphate pathway or glycolysis.
R-HSA-209905	Catecholamine biosynthesis	The catecholamine neurotransmitters dopamine, noradrenaline and adrenaline are found in nervous tissue of animals. They are synthesized in catecholaminergic neurons by four enzymes from tyrosine to adrenaline: tyrosine hydroxylase (TH); aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase (AADC); dopamine beta-hydroxylase (DBH); and phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase (PNMT).
R-HSA-426117	Cation-coupled Chloride cotransporters	The cation-chloride cotransporter family (SLC12 gene family) are membrane proteins that cotranslocate chloride (Cl-) with either Na+, K+, or both cations electroneutrally. The general topology of these proteins feature 12 transmembrane domains flanked by hydrophilic NH2 and COOH-terminal domains. They are secondary transporters and movement of these cations is determined by gradients established by primary transporters such as Na+-K+-ATPase. Cotransporters that use Na+ as the driving force move Cl- into the cell because Na+ concentration is higher in the extracellular region. Conversely, cotransporters that use K+ as the driving force move Cl- out of the cell because K+ concentration is higher inside the cell.<br><br>The SLC12 gene family contains nine members, of which seven are clearly characterized genes and two are orphans. They encode cotransporter proteins which are 1) involved in Cl- homeostasis, 2) regulate cell volume, 3) involved in transepithelial ion movement (salt reabsorption in the kidney) and 4) involved in response to neurotransmitters such as GABA. <br><br>Three different cotransporter subtypes are expressed by the seven characterized genes; one thiazide-sensitive Na+/Cl- cotransporter, two loop diuretic-sensitive Na+, K+/2Cl- cotransporters and four K+/Cl- cotransporters (Gamba G, 2005; Hebert SC et al, 2004).
R-HSA-5621575	CD209 (DC-SIGN) signaling	CD209 (also called as DC-SIGN (DC-specific intracellular adhesion molecule-3-grabbing non-integrin)) is a type II transmembrane C-type lectin receptor preferentially expressed on dendritic cells (DCs). CD209 functions as a pattern recognition receptor (PRR) that recognises several microorganisms and pathogens, contributing to generation of pathogen-tailored immune responses (Gringhuis & Geijtenbeek 2010, den Dunnen et al. 2009, Svajger et al. 2010). CD209 interacts with different mannose-expressing pathogens such as Mycobacterium tuberculosis and HIV-1 (Gringhuis et al. 2007, Geijtenbeek et al. 2000a). It also acts as an adhesion receptor that interacts with ICAM2 (intracellular adhesion molecule-2) on endothelial cells and ICAM3 on T cells (Geijtenbeek et al. 2000b,c). CD209 functions not only as an independent PRR, but is also implicated in the modulation of Toll-like receptor (TLR) signaling at the level of the transcription factor NF-kB (Gringhuis et al. 2009). CLEC7A (Dectin-1) and CD209 (DC-SIGN) signalling modulates Toll-like receptor (TLR) signalling through the kinase RAF1 that is independent of the SYK pathway but integrated with it at the level of NF-kB activation. The activation of RAF1 by CLEC7A or CD209 does not lead to activation of extracellular signal-regulated kinase 1 (ERK1)/2 or Mitogen-activated protein kinase kinase 1 (MEK1)/2 but leads to the phosphorylation and subsequent acetylation of RELA (p65). RELA phosphorylated on S276 not only positively regulates the activity of p65 through acetylation of p65, but also represses RELB activity by sequestering active RELB into inactive p65-RELB dimers that do not bind DNA (Gringhuis et al. 2007, Svajger et al. 2010, Jacque et al. 2005). RAF1-dependent signaling pathway is crucial in dectin-1 mediated immunity as it modulates both the canonical (promoting p65 phosphorylation and acetylation) and non-canonical (forming inactive p65-RELB dimers) NK-kB activation.
R-HSA-389356	CD28 co-stimulation	In naive T cells, CD28 costimulation enhances cell cycle entry, potently stimulates expression of both the mitogenic lymphokine interleukin-2 (IL-2) and its receptor, and stimulates the activation of an antiapoptotic program. CD28 engages with one or both members of the B7 receptor family, B7.1 and B7.2. Upon ligand binding the tyrosines and proline-rich motifs present in the cytoplasmic tail of CD28 are phosphorylated by Lck or Fyn. Upon phosphorylation CD28 recruits and induces phosphorylation and activation of a more restricted set of intracellular signaling components that, together with those mobilized by the TCR, contribute to convert membrane-based biochemical and biophysical changes into gene activation events. Proteins like PI3K, Vav-1, Tec and Itk kinases, AKT, and the Dok-1 adaptor have been identified as elements of the CD28 signaling pathway by biochemical or genetic approaches or both.
R-HSA-389357	CD28 dependent PI3K/Akt signaling	PI3Ks can be activated by a number of different receptors, including the TcR (T cell receptor), co-stimulatory receptors (CD28), cytokine receptors and chemokine receptors. However, the specific roles of PI3Ks downstream of these receptors vary. CD28 contains the YMNM consensus PI3K-binding motif, and PI3K recruitment by CD28 contributes to or complements TCR-dependent PI3K signaling. Activation of PI3K promotes PIP3 production at the plasma membrane and several potential target molecules for this phospholipid have been implicated in PI3K pathways downstream of the TcR and CD28. Of these targets, at least Vav and Akt have been implicated in CD28 costimulation of T cell activation. AKT/PKB connects PI3K to signaling pathways that promote cytokine transcription, survival, cell-cycle entry and growth.
R-HSA-389359	CD28 dependent Vav1 pathway	CD28 binds to several intracellular proteins including PI3 kinase, Grb-2, Gads and ITK. Grb-2 specifically co-operates with Vav-1 in the up-regulation of NFAT/AP-1 transcription. CD28 costimulation resulted in a prolonged and sustained phosphorylation and membrane localization of Vav1 in comparison to T-cell receptor activation alone. Tyrosine-phosphorylated Vav1 is an early point of integration between the signaling routes triggered by the T-cell receptor and CD28.<br>Vav1 transduces TCR and co-stimulatory signals to multiple biochemical pathways and several cytoskeleton-dependent processes. The products of Vav1 activation, Rac1 and Cdc42, in turn activate the mitogen-activated protein kinases JNK and p38. Vav1 is also required for TCR-induced calcium flux, activation of the ERK MAP kinase pathway, activation of the NF-kB transcription factor, inside-out activation of the integrin LFA-1, TCR clustering, and polarisation of the T cell.
R-HSA-174184	Cdc20:Phospho-APC/C mediated degradation of Cyclin A	Cyclin A, functions in mitosis as well as DNA replication and is degraded in the interim by the APC/C to permit normal chromosome segregation, cell division, and the onset of S phase (see Lukas and Bartek, 2004). Cyclin A is initially degraded early in mitosis by APC/C:Cdc20 when the spindle checkpoint is still active and degradation of securin and cyclin B is inhibited.
R-HSA-68689	CDC6 association with the ORC:origin complex	Cdc6 is a regulator of DNA replication initiation in both yeasts and human cells, but its mechanism of action differs between the two systems. Genetic studies in budding yeast (S. cerevisiae) and fission yeast (S. pombe) indicate that the normal function of Cdc6 protein is required to restrict DNA replication to once per cell cycle. Specifically, Cdc6 may function as an ATPase switch linked to Mcm2-7 association with the Cdt1:Cdc6:ORC:origin complex. In S. cerevisiae, Cdc6 protein is expressed late in the M phase of the cell cycle and, in cells with a prolonged G1 phase, late in G1. This protein has a short half-life, and is destroyed by ubiquitin-mediated proteolysis, mediated by the SCF complex. Human Cdc6 protein levels are reduced early in G1 but otherwise are constant throughout the cell cycle. Some reports have suggested that after cells enter S phase, Cdc6 is phosphorylated, excluded from the nucleus and subject to ubiquitination and degradation. Replenishing Cdc6 protein levels during G1 appears to be regulated by E2F transcription factors.
R-HSA-69017	CDK-mediated phosphorylation and removal of Cdc6	As cells enter S phase, HsCdc6p is phosphorylated by CDK promoting its export from the nucleus (see Bell and Dutta 2002). 
R-HSA-375170	CDO in myogenesis	CDO/Cdon (cell-adhesion-molecule-related/downregulated by oncogenes) is a type I transmembrane multifunctional co-receptor consisting of five immunoglobulin and three fibronectin type III (FNIII) repeats in the extracellular domain, and an intracellular domain with no identifiable motifs. It has been implicated in enhancing muscle differentiation in promyogenic cells. CDO exert its promyogenic effects as a component of multiprotein complexes that include the closely related factor Boc, the Ig superfamily receptor neogenin and its ligand netrin-3, and the adhesion molecules N- and M-cadherin. CDO modulates the Cdc42 and p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) pathways via a direct association with two scaffold-type proteins, JLP and Bnip-2, to regulate activities of myogenic bHLH factors and myogenic differentiation. CDO activates myogenic bHLH factors via enhanced heterodimer formation, most likely by inducing hyper-phosphorylation of E proteins. <br>Myogenic basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) proteins are master regulatory proteins that activate the transcription of many muscle-specific genes during myogenesis. These myogenic bHLH proteins also referred to as MyoD family includes four members, MyoD, myogenin, myf5 and MRF4. These myogenic factors dimerize with E-proteins such as E12/E47, ITF-2 and HEB to form heterodimeric complexes that bind to a conserved DNA sequence known as the E box, which is present in the promoters and enhancers of most muscle-specific genes. Myocyte enhancer binding factor 2 (MEF2), which is a member of the MADS box family, also plays an important role in muscle differentiation. MEF2 activates transcription by binding to the consensus sequence, called the MEF2-binding site, which is also found in the control regions of numerous muscle-specific genes. MEF2 and myogenic bHLH proteins synergistically activate expression of muscle-specific genes via protein-protein interactions between DNA-binding domains of these heterologous classes of transcription factors. Members of the MyoD and MEF2 family of transcription factors associate combinatorially to control myoblast specification, differentiation and proliferation.
R-HSA-68827	CDT1 association with the CDC6:ORC:origin complex	Initiation protein Cdt1 was first identified in X. laevis, where it has been shown to be the second component of licensing factor (RLF-B) and in S. pombe. Cdt1 homologs have been identified in D. melanogaster, humans, and S. cerevisiae. Genetic studies in S. pombe have shown that binding of Cdc6 to chromatin requires the prior binding of Cdc18, the S. pombe homolog of Cdc6. In humans, the function of CDT1 is regulated during the cell cycle by its tight association with an inhibitory factor, geminin.
R-HSA-69620	Cell Cycle Checkpoints	A hallmark of the human cell cycle in normal somatic cells is its precision. This remarkable fidelity is achieved by a number of signal transduction pathways, known as checkpoints, which monitor cell cycle progression ensuring an interdependency of S-phase and mitosis, the integrity of the genome and the fidelity of chromosome segregation.<p>Checkpoints are layers of control that act to delay CDK activation when defects in the division program occur. As the CDKs functioning at different points in the cell cycle are regulated by different means, the various checkpoints differ in the biochemical mechanisms by which they elicit their effect. However, all checkpoints share a common hierarchy of a sensor, signal transducers, and effectors that interact with the CDKs.<p>The stability of the genome in somatic cells contrasts to the almost universal genomic instability of tumor cells. There are a number of documented genetic lesions in checkpoint genes, or in cell cycle genes themselves, which result either directly in cancer or in a predisposition to certain cancer types. Indeed, restraint over cell cycle progression and failure to monitor genome integrity are likely prerequisites for the molecular evolution required for the development of a tumor. Perhaps most notable amongst these is the p53 tumor suppressor gene, which is mutated in >50% of human tumors. Thus, the importance of the checkpoint pathways to human biology is clear.
R-HSA-69278	Cell Cycle, Mitotic	The replication of the genome and the subsequent segregation of chromosomes into daughter cells are controlled by a series of events collectively known as the cell cycle. DNA replication is carried out during a discrete temporal period known as the S (synthesis)-phase, and chromosome segregation occurs during a massive reorganization to cellular architecture at mitosis. Two gap-phases separate these major cell cycle events: G1 between mitosis and S-phase, and G2 between S-phase and mitosis. In the development of the human body, cells can exit the cell cycle for a period and enter a quiescent state known as G0, or terminally differentiate into cells that will not divide again, but undergo morphological development to carry out the wide variety of specialized functions of individual tissues.<br>A family of protein serine/threonine kinases known as the cyclin-dependent kinases (CDKs) controls progression through the cell cycle. As the name suggests, the activity of the catalytic subunit is dependent on binding to a cyclin partner. The human genome encodes several cyclins and several CDKs, with their names largely derived from the order in which they were identified. The oscillation of cyclin abundance is one important mechanism by which these enzymes phosphorylate key substrates to promote events at the relevant time and place. Additional regulatory proteins and post-translational modifications ensure that CDK activity is precisely regulated, frequently confined to a narrow window of activity.
R-HSA-204998	Cell death signalling via NRAGE, NRIF and NADE	p75NTR is a key regulator of neuronal apoptosis, both during development and after injury. Apoptosis is triggered by binding of either mature neurotrophin or proneurotrophin (proNGF, proBDNF). ProNGF is at least 10 times more potent than mature NGF in inducing apoptosis. TRKA signalling protects neurons from apoptosis. The molecular mechanisms involved in p75NTR-apoptosis are not well understood. The death signalling requires activation of c-JUN N-terminal Kinase (JNK), as well as transcriptional events. JNK activation appears to involve the receptor interacting proteins TRAF6, NRAGE, and Rac. The transcription events are thought to be regulated by another p75-interacting protein, NRIF. Two other p75-interacting proteins, NADE and Necdin, have been implicated in apoptosis, but their role is less clear.
R-HSA-1222541	Cell redox homeostasis	The most important response of <i>Mtb</i> to oxidative stress is provided by catalase and peroxiredoxins, both of which get their reducing equivalents through a network of disulfide proteins and, finally, from NAD(P)H. Multiple redundancies make choosing a good drug target difficult (Koul et al. 2011). Optimum efficacy can only be expected from inhibitors of the most upstream components of the redox cascades, i.e. the NAD(P)H-dependent reductases TrxB and Lpd (Jaeger & Flohe 2006).
R-HSA-202733	Cell surface interactions at the vascular wall	Leukocyte extravasation is a rigorously controlled process that guides white cell movement from the vascular lumen to sites of tissue inflammation. The powerful adhesive interactions that are required for leukocytes to withstand local flow at the vessel wall is a multistep process mediated by different adhesion molecules. Platelets adhered to injured vessel walls form strong adhesive substrates for leukocytes. For instance, the initial tethering and rolling of leukocytes over the site of injury are mediated by reversible binding of selectins to their cognate cell-surface glycoconjugates.<p> Endothelial cells are tightly connected through various proteins, which regulate the organization of the junctional complex and bind to cytoskeletal proteins or cytoplasmic interaction partners that allow the transfer of intracellular signals. An important role for these junctional proteins in governing the transendothelial migration of leukocytes under normal or inflammatory conditions has been established.<p> This pathway describes some of the key interactions that assist in the process of platelet and leukocyte interaction with the endothelium, in response to injury.
R-HSA-1500931	Cell-Cell communication	Cell-to-Cell communication is crucial for multicellular organisms because it allows organisms to coordinate the activity of their cells. Some cell-to-cell communication requires direct cell-cell contacts and this is mediated by different receptors on their cell surfaces. Members of the immunoglobulin superfamily (IgSF) proteins are some of the cell surface receptors involved in cell-cell recognition, communication and many aspects of the axon guidance and synapse formation-the crucial processes during embryonal development (Rougon & Hobert 2003).<br>Cells interact with adjacent cells as well as with extracellular matrix in tissues and these interactions are supported by cell junctions. Cell junctions consists of protein complexes and include various cell adhesion molecules (CAMs). Cell junctions are more abundant in epithelial cells and there are three major types of cell junctions: adherens junctions (AJs), tight junctions (TJs), and desmosomes.
R-HSA-421270	Cell-cell junction organization	Epithelial cell-cell contacts consist of three major adhesion systems: adherens junctions (AJs), tight junctions (TJs), and desmosomes. These adhesion systems differ in their function and composition. AJs play a critical role in initiating cell-cell contacts and promoting the maturation and maintenance of the contacts (reviewed in Ebnet, 2008; Hartsock and Nelson, 2008). TJs form physical barriers in various tissues and regulate paracellular transport of water, ions, and small water soluble molecules (reviewed in Rudini and Dejana, 2008; Ebnet, 2008; Aijaz et al., 2006; Furuse and Tsukit, 2006). Desmosomes mediate strong cell adhesion linking the intermediate filament cytoskeletons between cells and playing roles in wound repair, tissue morphogenesis, and cell signaling (reviewed in Holthofer et al., 2007).
R-HSA-446353	Cell-extracellular matrix interactions	Cell-extracellular matrix (ECM) interactions play a critical role in regulating a variety of cellular processes in multicellular organisms including motility, shape change, survival, proliferation and differentiation. Cell-ECM contact is mediated by transmembrane cell adhesion receptors, such as integrins, that interact with extracellular matrix proteins as well as a number of cytoplasmic adaptor proteins. Many of these adaptor proteins physically interact with the actin cytoskeleton or function in signal transduction. <br>Several protein complexes interact with the cytoplasmic tail of integrins and function in transducing bi-directional signals between the ECM and intracellular signaling pathways (reviewed in Sepulveda et al., 2005).<br>Early events that are triggered by interactions with ECM, such as formation/turnover of Focal Adhesions, regulation of actin dynamics and protrusion of lamellipodia to promote cellular spreading and motility are modulated by PINCH- ILK- parvin complexes (see Sepulveda et al., 2005). A number of partners of the PINCH-ILK-parvin complex components have been identified that regulate and/or mediate the functions of these complexes (reviewed in Wu, 2004). Interactions with some of these partners modulate cytoskeletal remodeling and cell spreading.
R-HSA-3371556	Cellular response to heat stress	In response to exposure to elevated temperature and certain other proteotoxic stimuli (e.g., hypoxia, free radicals) cells activate a number of cytoprotective mechanisms known collectively as "heat shock response". Major aspects of the heat shock response (HSR) are evolutionarily conserved events that allow cells to recover from protein damage induced by stress (Liu XD et al. 1997; Voellmy R & Boellmann F 2007; Shamovsky I & Nudler E 2008; Anckar J & Sistonen L 2011). The main hallmark of HSR is the dramatic alteration of the gene expression pattern. A diverse group of protein genes is induced by the exposure to temperatures 3-5 degrees higher than physiological. Functionally, most of these genes are molecular chaperones that ensure proper protein folding and quality control to maintain cell proteostasis.<p>At the same time, heat shock-induced phosphorylation of translation initiation factor eIF2alpha leads to the shutdown of the nascent polypeptide synthesis reducing the burden on the chaperone system that has to deal with the increased amount of misfolded and thermally denatured proteins (Duncan RF & Hershey JWB 1989; Sarkar A et al. 2002; Spriggs KA et al. 2010).<p>The induction of HS gene expression primarily occurs at the level of transcription and is mediated by heat shock transcription factor HSF1(Sarge KD et al. 1993; Baler R et al. 1993). Human cells express five members of HSF protein family: HSF1, HSF2, HSF4, HSFX and HSFY. HSF1 is the master regulator of the heat inducible gene expression (Zuo J et al. 1995; Akerfelt M et al. 2010). HSF2 is activated in response to certain developmental stimuli in addition to being co-activated with HSF1 to provide promoter-specific fine-tuning of the HS response by forming heterotrimers with HSF1 (Ostling P et al. 2007; Sandqvist A et al. 2009). HSF4 lacks the transcription activation domain and acts as a repressor of certain genes during HS (Nakai A et al. 1997; Tanabe M et al. 1999; Kim SA et al. 2012). Two additional family members HSFX and HSFY, which are located on the X and Y chromosomes respectively, remain to be characterized (Bhowmick BK et al. 2006; Shinka T et al. 2004; Kichine E et al. 2012).<p>Under normal conditions HSF1 is present in both cytoplasm and nucleus in the form of an inactive monomer. The monomeric state of HSF1 is maintained by an intricate network of protein-protein interactions that include the association with HSP90 multichaperone complex, HSP70/HSP40 chaperone machinery, as well as intramolecular interaction of two conserved hydrophobic repeat regions. Monomeric HSF1 is constitutively phosphorylated on Ser303 and Ser 307 by (Zou J et al. 1998; Knauf U et al. 1996; Kline MP & Moromoto RI 1997; Guettouche T et al. 2005). This phosphorylation plays an essential role in ensuring cytoplasmic localization of at least a subpopulation of HSF1 molecules under normal conditions (Wang X et al. 2004).<p>Exposure to heat and other proteotoxic stimuli results in the release of HSF1 from the inhibitory complex with chaperones and its subsequent trimerization, which is promoted by its interaction with translation elongation factor eEF1A1 (Baler R et al. 1993; Shamovsky I et al. 2006; Herbomel G et al 2013). The trimerization is believed to involve intermolecular interaction between hydrophobic repeats 1-3 leading to the formation of a triple coil structure. Additional stabilization of the HSF1 trimer is provided by the formation of intermolecular S-S bonds between Cys residues in the DNA binding domain (Lu M et al.2008). Trimeric HSF1 is predominantly localized in the nucleus where it binds the specific sequence in the promoter of hsp genes (Sarge KD et al. 1993; Wang Y and Morgan WD 1994). The binding sequence for HSF1 (HSE, heat shock element) contains series of inverted repeats nGAAn in head-to-tail orientation, with at least three elements being required for the high affinity binding. Binding of the HSF1 trimer to the promoter is not sufficient to induce transcription of the gene (Cotto J et al. 1996). In order to do so, HSF1 needs to undergo inducible phosphorylation on specific Ser residues such as Ser230, Ser326. This phosphorylated form of HSF1 trimer is capable of increasing the promoter initiation rate. HSF1 bound to DNA promotes recruiting components of the transcription mediator complex and relieving promoter-proximal pause of RNA polymerase II through its interaction with TFIIH transcription factor (Yuan CX & Gurley WB 2000).<p>HSF1 activation is regulated in a precise and tight manner at multiple levels (Zuo J et al. 1995; Cotto J et al. 1996). This allows fast and robust activation of HS response to minimize proteotoxic effects of the stress. The exact set of HSF1 inducible genes is probably cell type specific. Moreover, cells in different pathophysiological states will display different but overlapping profile of HS inducible genes.
R-HSA-2262749	Cellular response to hypoxia	Oxygen plays a central role in the functioning of human cells: it is both essential for normal metabolism and toxic. To begin the annotation of stress responses in Reactome, we have annotated one aspect of cellular responses to oxygen (Semenza 2004), the role of hypoxia-inducible factor in regulating cellular transcriptional responses to changes in oxygen availability.
R-HSA-2262752	Cellular responses to stress	Cells are subject to external molecular and physical stresses such as foreign molecules that perturb metabolic or signaling processes, and changes in temperature or pH. The ability of cells and tissues to modulate molecular processes in response to such external stresses is essential to the maintenance of tissue homeostasis (Kultz 2005).
R-HSA-2559583	Cellular Senescence	Cellular senescence involves irreversible growth arrest accompanied by phenotypic changes such as enlarged morphology, reorganization of chromatin through formation of senescence-associated heterochromatic foci (SAHF), and changes in gene expression that result in secretion of a number of proteins that alter local tissue environment, known as senescence-associated secretory phenotype (SASP).<br><br>Senescence is considered to be a cancer protective mechanism and is also involved in aging. Senescent cells accumulate in aged tissues (reviewed by Campisi 1997 and Lopez-Otin 2013), which may be due to an increased senescence rate and/or decrease in the rate of clearance of senescent cells. In a mouse model of accelerated aging, clearance of senescent cells delays the onset of age-related phenotypes (Baker et al. 2011).<p>Cellular senescence can be triggered by the aberrant activation of oncogenes or loss-of-function of tumor suppressor genes, and this type of senescence is known as the oncogene-induced senescence, with RAS signaling-induced senescence being the best studied. Oxidative stress, which may or may not be caused by oncogenic RAS signaling, can also trigger senescence. Finally, the cellular senescence program can be initiated by DNA damage, which may be caused by reactive oxygen species (ROS) during oxidative stress, and by telomere shortening caused by replicative exhaustion which may be due to oncogenic signaling. The senescent phenotype was first reported by Hayflick and Moorhead in 1961, when they proposed replicative senescence as a mechanism responsible for the cessation of mitotic activity and morphological changes that occur in human somatic diploid cell strains as a consequence of serial passaging, preventing the continuous culture of untransformed cells-the Hayflick limit (Hayflick and Moorhead 1961).<p>Senescent cells may remain viable for years, such as senescent melanocytes of moles and nevi, or they can be removed by phagocytic cells. The standard marker for immunohistochemical detection of senescent cells is senescence-associated beta-galactosidase (SA-beta-Gal), a lysosomal enzyme that is not required for senescence.<p>For a recent review, please refer to Collado et al. 2007, Adams 2009, Kuilman et al. 2010. For a review of differential gene expression between senescent and immortalized cells, please refer to Fridman and Tainsky 2008.
R-HSA-380287	Centrosome maturation	The centrosome is the primary microtubule organizing center (MTOC) in vertebrate cells and plays an important role in orchestrating the formation of the mitotic spindle. Centrosome maturation is an early event in this process and involves a major reorganization of centrosomal material at the G2/M transition. During maturation, centrosomes undergo a dramatic increase in size and microtubule nucleating capacity. As part of this process, a number of proteins and complexes, including some that are required for microtubule nucleation and anchoring, are recruited to the centrosome while others that are required for organization of interphase microtubules and centrosome cohesion are lost (reviewed in Schatten, 2008; Raynaud-Messina and Merdes 2007).
R-HSA-193681	Ceramide signalling	In certain cell types, ligand binding to p75NTR leads to ceramide production, which can mediate either cell survival (e.g. in noecotical subplate neurons) or apoptosis (e.g. in oligodendrocytes). Low levels of ceramide are also able to stimulate axonal outgrowth in hippocampal neurons.
R-HSA-418457	cGMP effects	Cyclic guanosine monophosphate (cGMP) is an important secondary messenger synthesized by guanylate cyclases. cGMP has effects on phosphodiesterases (PDE), ion-gated channels, and the cGMP-dependent protein kinases (cGK, Protein Kinase G or PKG). It is involved in regulation of several physiological functions including vasodilation, platelet aggregation and neurotransmission. Elevation of intracellular cGMP activates PKG (Haslam et al. 1999) which regulates several intracellular molecules and pathways including the vasodilator-stimulated phosphoprotein (VASP) (Halbrugge et al. 1990) and the ERK pathway (Hood and Granger 1998, Li et al. 2001). cGMP mediates nitric oxide (NO)-induced vascular smooth muscle relaxation (Furchgott and Vanhoutte 1989). Phosphodiesterase 5 (PDE5) hydrolyzes cGMP; the PDE5 inhibitor sildenafil (Viagra) increases intracellular cGMP and thereby can be used as a treatment for erectile dysfunction (Corbin and Francis 1999). The role of the cGMP and PKG in platelet activation was controversial as increases in platelet cGMP levels were observed in response to both platelet agonists (thrombin, ADP or collagen) and inhibitors (NO donors such as sodium nitroprusside), but it is currently accepted that PKG inhibits platelet activation (Haslam et al. 1999). Consistent with this, nitric oxide (NO) donors that inhibit platelet activation enhance intracellular cGMP (Haslam et al. 1999). cGMP also plays an important stimulatory role in GPIb-IX-mediated platelet activation. Platelet responses to cGMP have been proposed to be biphasic, consisting of an early stimulatory response that promotes platelet activation followed by a delayed platelet inhibition that serves to limit the size of platelet aggregates (Li et al 2003).
R-HSA-390466	Chaperonin-mediated protein folding	The eukaryotic chaperonin TCP-1 ring complex (TRiC/ CCT) plays an essential role in the folding of a subset of proteins prominent among which are the actins and tubulins (reviewed in Altschuler and Willison, 2008). CCT/TRiC is an example of a type II chaperonin, defined (in contrast to type I) as functioning in the absence of a cochaperonin. TriC/CCT is a multisubunit toroidal complex that forms a cylinder containing two back-to-back stacked rings enclosing a cavity where substrate folding occurs in an ATP dependent process (reviewed in Altschuler and Willison, 2008 ). CCT/TriC contains eight paralogous subunits that are conserved throughout eukaryotic organisms (Leroux and Hartl 2000; Archibald et al. 2001; Valpuesta et al. 2002). CCT-mediated folding of non-native substrate protein involves capture through hydrophobic contacts with multiple chaperonin subunits followed by transfer of the protein into the central ring cavity where it folds. Although folding is initiated within this central cavity, only 5%-20% of proteins that are released have partitioned to the native state. The remaining portion is then recaptured by other chaperonin molecules (Cowan and Lewis 2001). This cycling process may be repeated multiple times before a target protein partitions to the native state. In the cell, binding to CCT occurs via presentation of target protein bound to upstream chaperones. During translation, the emerging polypeptide chain may be transferred from the ribosome to CCT via the chaperone Prefoldin (Vainberg et al., 1998) or the Hsp70 chaperone machinery (Melville et al., 2003). While the majority of CCT substrates ultimately partition to the native state as soluble, monomeric proteins, alpha and beta tubulin are unusual in that they require additional cofactors that are required to assemble the tubulin heterodimer (Cowan and Lewis 2001).
R-HSA-380108	Chemokine receptors bind chemokines	Chemokine receptors are cytokine receptors found on the surface of certain cells, which interact with a type of cytokine called a chemokine. Following interaction, these receptors trigger a flux of intracellular calcium which leads to chemotaxis. Chemokine receptors are divided into different families, CXC chemokine receptors, CC chemokine receptors, CX3C chemokine receptors and XC chemokine receptors that correspond to the 4 distinct subfamilies of chemokines they bind.
R-HSA-75035	Chk1/Chk2(Cds1) mediated inactivation of Cyclin B:Cdk1 complex	DNA damage induced activation of the checkpoint kinases Chk1/Chk2(Cds1) results in the conversion and/or maintenance of CyclinB:Cdc2 complex in its Tyrosine 15 phosphorylated (inactive) state. Cdc2 activity is regulated by a balance between the phosphorylation and dephosphorylation by the Wee1/Myt1 kinase and Cdc25 phosphatase. Inactivation of the Cyclin B:Cdc2 complex likely involves both inactivation of Cdc25 and/or stimulation of Wee1/Myt1 kinase activity.
R-HSA-447041	CHL1 interactions	Close homolog of L1 (CHL1) is a member of the L1 family of cell adhesion molecules expressed by subpopulations of neurons and glia in the central and peripheral nervous system. CHL1 like L1 promotes neuron survival and neurite outgrowth. CHL1 shares the basic structural arrangement of L1 family members yet in contrast to all the members it is not capable of forming homophilic adhesion. The second Ig-like domain of CHL1 contains the integrin interaction motif RGD rather than with in the sixth Ig-like domain as in L1, however the sixth Ig-like domain of CHL1 has another potential integrin binding motif DGEA. CHL1 binds NP-1 via the Ig1 sequence FASNRL to mdediate repulsive axon guidance to Sema3A. CHL1 is the only L1 family member with an altered sequence (FIGAY) in the ankyrin-binding domain, and it lacks the sorting/endocytosis RSLE motif, which is characteristic of other L1 family members.
R-HSA-191273	Cholesterol biosynthesis	Cholesterol is synthesized de novo from from acetyl CoA. The overall synthetic process is outlined in the figure below. Enzymes whose regulation plays a major role in determining the rate of cholesterol synthesis in the body are highlighted in red, and connections to other metabolic processes are indicated. The transformation of lanosterol into cholesterol requires multiple steps, including the removal of three methyl groups, the reduction of one double bond and the migration of another. These reactions may not occur in a single fixed order in the body, so the linear pathway laid out here following the work of Gaylor and colleagues (Gaylor 2002) is an oversimplification of the process that occurs in vivo. Defects in several of the enzymes involved in this process are associated with human disease and have provided useful insights into the regulatory roles of cholesterol and its synthetic intermediates in human development (Herman 2003; Song et al. 2005).
R-HSA-2022870	Chondroitin sulfate biosynthesis	Chondroitin sulfate (CS) glycosaminoglycan consists of N-acetylgalactosamine (GalNAc) residues alternating in glycosidic linkages with glucuronic acid (GlcA). GalNAc residues are sulfated to varying degrees on 4- and/or 6- positions. The steps below describe the biosynthesis of a simple CS molecule (Pavao et al. 2006, Silbert & Sugumaran 2002).
R-HSA-1793185	Chondroitin sulfate/dermatan sulfate metabolism	Chondroitin sulfate (CS) is a sulfated glycosaminoglycan (GAG). CS chains are unbranched polysaccharides of varying length containing two alternating monosaccharides: D-glucuronic acid (GlcA) and N-acetyl-D-galactosamine (GalNAc). The chains are usually attached to proteins forming a proteoglycan. CS is an important structural component of cartilage due to it's ability to withstand compression. It is also a widely used dietary supplement for osteoarthritis. When some of the GlcA residues are epimerized into L-iduronic acid (IdoA) the resulting disaccharide is then referred to as dermatan sulfate (DS) (Silbert & Sugumaran 2002). DS is the most predominant GAG in skin but is also found in blood vessels, heart valves, tendons, and the lungs. It may play roles in cardiovascular disease, tumorigenesis, infection, wound repair and fibrosis (Trowbridge & Gallo 2002).
R-HSA-163765	ChREBP activates metabolic gene expression	ChREBP (Carbohydrate Response Element Binding Protein) is a large multidomain protein containing a nuclear localization signal near its amino terminus, polyproline domains, a basic helix-loop-helix-leucine zipper domain, and a leucine-zipper-like domain (Uyeda et al., 2002). Its dephosphorylation in response to molecular signals associated with the well-fed state allows it to enter the nucleus, interact with MLX protein, and bind to ChRE DNA sequence motifs near Acetyl-CoA carboxylase, Fatty acid synthase, and Pyruvate kinase (L isoform) genes (Ishi et al.2004). This sequence of events is outlined schematically in the picture below (adapted from Kawaguchi et al. (2001) - copyright (2001) National Academy of Sciences, U.S.A.).
R-HSA-3247509	Chromatin modifying enzymes	Eukaryotic DNA is associated with histone proteins and organized into a complex nucleoprotein structure called chromatin. This structure decreases the accessibility of DNA but also helps to protect it from damage. Access to DNA is achieved by highly regulated local chromatin decondensation. <br><br>The 'building block' of chromatin is the nucleosome. This contains ~150 bp of DNA wrapped around a histone octamer which consists of two each of the core histones H2A, H2B, H3 and H4 in a 1.65 left-handed superhelical turn (Luger et al. 1997, Andrews & Luger 2011).<br><br>Most organisms have multiple genes encoding the major histone proteins. The replication-dependent genes for the five histone proteins are clustered together in the genome in all metazoans. Human replication-dependent histones occur in a large cluster on chromosome 6 termed HIST1, a smaller cluster HIST2 on chromosome 1q21, and a third small cluster HIST3 on chromosome 1q42 (Marzluff et al. 2002). Histone genes are named systematically according to their cluster and location within the cluster.<br><br><br><br><br>The 'major' histone genes are expressed primarily during the S phase of the cell cycle and code for the bulk of cellular histones. Histone variants are usually present as single-copy genes that are not restricted in their expression to S phase, contain introns and are often polyadenylated (Old & Woodland 1984 ). Some variants have significant differences in primary sequence and distinct biophysical characteristics that are thought to alter the properties of nucleosomes. Others localize to specific regions of the genome. Some variants can exchange with pre-existing major histones during development and differentiation, referred to as replacement histones (Kamakaka & Biggins 2005). These variants can become the predominant species in differentiated cells (Pina & Suau 1987, Wunsch et al. 1991). Histone variants may have specialized functions in regulating chromatin dynamics. <br><br>The H2A histone family has the highest sequence divergence and largest number of variants. H2A.Z and H2A.XH2A are considered 'universal variants', found in almost all organisms (Talbert & Henikoff 2010). Variants differ mostly in the C-terminus, including the docking domain, implicated in interactions with the (H3-H4)x2 tetramer within the nucleosome, and in the L1 loop, which is the interaction interface of H2A-H2B dimers (Bonisch & Hake 2012). Canonical H2A proteins are expresssed almost exclusively during S-phase. There are several nearly identical variants (Marzluff et al. 2002). No functional specialization of these canonical H2A isoforms has been demonstrated (Bonisch & Hake 2012). Reversible histone modifications such as acetylation and methylation regulate transcription from genomic DNA, defining the 'readability' of genes in specific tissues (Kouzarides 2007, Marmorstein & Trievel 2009, Butler et al. 2012).<br><br>N.B. The coordinates of post-translational modifications represented here follow Reactome standardized naming, which includes the UniProt standard practice whereby coordinates refer to the translated protein before any further processing. Histone literature typically refers to coordinates of the protein after the initiating methionine has been removed, therefore the coordinates of post-translated histone residues described here are frequently +1 when compared with the literature. For more information on Reactome's standards for naming pathway events, the molecules that participate in them and representation of post-translational modifications, please refer to Naming Conventions on the Reactome Wiki or Jupe et al. 2014.
R-HSA-4839726	Chromatin organization	Chromatin organization refers to the composition and conformation of complexes between DNA, protein and RNA. It is determined by processes that result in the specification, formation or maintenance of the physical structure of eukaryotic chromatin. These processes include histone modification, DNA modification, and transcription. The modifications are bound by specific proteins that alter the conformation of chromatin.
R-HSA-73886	Chromosome Maintenance	Chromosome maintenance is critical for stable chromosome function in mammalian and other eukaryotic cells. Aspects of telomere maintenance and nucleosome assembly are covered here. 
R-HSA-174800	Chylomicron-mediated lipid transport	Chylomicrons transport triacylglycerol, phospholipid, and cholesterol derived from dietary lipid from the small intestine to other tissues of the body. Each chylomicron assembles around a single molecule of apolipoprotein B-48 (Phillips et al. 1997) which at the time the particle leaves the intestine and enters the lymphatic circulation is complexed with >200,000 molecules of triacylglycerol (TG), ~35,000 of phospholipid, ~11,000 of cholesterol ester, ~8,000 of free cholesterol, ~60 copies of apolipoprotein A-I, ~15 copies of apolipoprotein A-IV, and copies of apolipoprotein A-II (Bhattacharya and Redgrave 1981; Havel and Kane 2001). As chylomicrons circulate in the body, they acquire molecules of apolipoproteins C and E, and through interaction with endothelial lipases can lose a large fraction of their triacylglycerol. These changes convert them to chylomicron remnants which bind to LDL receptors, primarily on the surfaces of liver cells, clearing them from the circulation. This whole sequence of events is rapid: the normal lifespan of a chylomicron is 30 - 60 minutes (Havel and Kane 2001).
R-HSA-400253	Circadian Clock	At the center of the mammalian circadian clock is a negative transcription/translation-based feedback loop: The BMAL1:CLOCK/NPAS2 (ARNTL:CLOCK/NPAS2) heterodimer transactivates CRY and PER genes by binding E-box elements in their promoters; the CRY and PER proteins then inhibit transactivation by BMAL1:CLOCK/NPAS2. BMAL1:CLOCK/NPAS2 activates transcription of CRY, PER, and several other genes in the morning. Levels of PER and CRY proteins rise during the day and inhibit expression of CRY, PER, and other BMAL1:CLOCK/NPAS2-activated genes in the afternoon and evening. During the night CRY and PER proteins are targeted for degradation by phosphorylation and polyubiquitination, allowing the cycle to commence again in the morning. <br>Transcription of the BMAL1 (ARNTL) gene is controlled by ROR-alpha and REV-ERBA (NR1D1), both of which are targets of BMAL1:CLOCK/NPAS2 in mice and both of which compete for the same element (RORE) in the BMAL1 promoter. ROR-alpha (RORA) activates transcription of BMAL1; REV-ERBA represses transcription of BMAL1. This mutual control forms a secondary, reinforcing loop of the circadian clock. REV-ERBA shows strong circadian rhythmicity and confers circadian expression on BMAL1. <br>BMAL1 can form heterodimers with either CLOCK or NPAS2, which act redundantly but show different tissue specificity. The BMAL1:CLOCK and BMAL1:NPAS2 heterodimers activate a set of genes that possess E-box elements (consensus CACGTG) in their promoters. This confers circadian expression on the genes. The PER genes (PER1, PER2, PER3) and CRY genes (CRY1, CRY2) are among those activated by BMAL1:CLOCK and BMAL1:NPAS2. PER and CRY mRNA accumulates during the morning and the proteins accumulate during the afternoon. PER and CRY proteins form complexes in the cytosol and these are bound by either CSNK1D or CSNK1E kinases which phosphorylate PER and CRY. The phosphorylated PER:CRY:kinase complex is translocated into the nucleus due to the nuclear localization signal of PER and CRY. Within the nucleus the PER:CRY complexes bind BMAL1:CLOCK and BMAL1:NPAS2, inhibiting their transactivation activity and their phosphorylation. This reduces expression of the target genes of BMAL1:CLOCK and BMAL1:NPAS2 during the afternoon and evening. <br>PER:CRY complexes also traffic out of the nucleus into the cytosol due to the nuclear export signal of PER. During the night PER:CRY complexes are polyubiquitinated and degraded, allowing the cycle to begin again. Phosphorylated PER is bound by Beta-TrCP1, a cytosolic F-box type component of some SCF E3 ubiquitin ligases. CRY is bound by FBXL3, a nucleoplasmic F-box type component of some SCF E3 ubiquitin ligases. Phosphorylation of CRY1 by Adenosine monophosphate-activated kinase (AMPK) enhances degradation of CRY1. PER and CRY are subsequently polyubiquitinated and proteolyzed by the 26S proteasome.<br>The circadian clock is cell-autonomous and some, but not all cells of the body exhibit circadian rhythms in metabolism, cell division, and gene transcription. The suprachiasmatic nucleus (SCN) in the hypothalamus is the major clock in the body and receives its major input from light (via retinal neurons) and a minor input from nutrient intake. The SCN and other brain tissues determine waking and feeding cycles and influence the clocks in other tissues by hormone secretion and nervous stimulation. Independently of the SCN, other tissues such as liver receive inputs from signals from the brain and from nutrients.
R-HSA-71403	Citric acid cycle (TCA cycle)	In the citric acid or tricarboxylic acid (TCA) cycle, the acetyl group of acetyl CoA (derived primarily from oxidative decarboxylation of pyruvate, beta-oxidation of long-chain fatty acids, and catabolism of ketone bodies and several amino acids) can be completely oxidized to CO2 in reactions that also yield one high-energy phosphate bond (as GTP or ATP) and four reducing equivalents (three NADH + H+, and one FADH2). The NADH and FADH2 are then oxidized by the electron transport chain to yield nine more high-energy phosphate bonds (as ATP). All reactions of the citric acid cycle take place in the mitochondrion.<p>Eight canonical reactions mediate the synthesis of citrate from acetyl-CoA and oxaloacetate and the metabolism of citrate to re-form oxaloacetate. Six additional reactions are included here. Three reversible reactions, the interconversions of citrate and isocitrate, of fumarate and malate, and of malate and oxaloacetate are annotated in both their canonical (forward) and reverse directions. The synthesis of succinate from succinyl-CoA can be coupled to the phosphorylation of either GDP (the canonical reaction) or ADP; both reactions are annotated. Two mitochondrial isocitrate dehydrogenase isozymes catalyze the oxidative decarboxylation of isocitrate to form alpha-ketoglutarate (2-oxoglutarate): IDH3 catalyzes the canonical reaction coupled to the reduction of NAD+, while IDH2 catalyzes the same reaction coupled to reduction of NADP+, a reaction whose normal physiological function is unclear. Both reactions are annotated. Finally, a reaction is annotated in which reducing equivalents are transferred from NADPH to NAD+ coupled to proton import across the inner mitochondrial membrane.<p>The cyclical nature of the reactions responsible for the oxidation of acetate was first suggested by Hans Krebs, from biochemical studies of pigeon breast muscle (Krebs et al. 1938; Krebs and Eggleston 1940). Many of the molecular details of individual reactions were worked out by Ochoa and colleagues, largely through studies of enzymes purified from pig heart (Ochoa 1980). While the human homologues of these enzymes have all been identified, their biochemical characterization has in general been limited and many molecular details of the human reactions are inferred from those worked out in studies of the model systems.
R-HSA-373076	Class A/1 (Rhodopsin-like receptors)	Rhodopsin-like receptors (class A/1) are the largest group of GPCRs and are the best studied group from a functional and structural point of view. They show great diversity at the sequence level and thus, can be subdivided into 19 subfamilies (Subfamily A1-19) based on a phylogenetic analysis (Joost P and Methner A, 2002). They represent members which include hormone, light and neurotransmitter receptors and encompass a wide range of functions including many autocrine, paracrine and endocrine processes.
R-HSA-373080	Class B/2 (Secretin family receptors)	This family is known as Family B (secretin-receptor family, family 2) G-protein-coupled receptors. Family B GPCRs include secretin, calcitonin, parathyroid hormone/parathyroid hormone-related peptides and vasoactive intestinal peptide receptors; all of which activate adenylyl cyclase and the phosphatidyl-inositol-calcium pathway (Harmar AJ, 2001).
R-HSA-420499	Class C/3 (Metabotropic glutamate/pheromone receptors)	The class C G-protein-coupled receptors are a class of G-protein coupled receptors that include the metabotropic glutamate receptors and several additional receptors (Brauner-Osborne H et al, 2007). Family C GPCRs have a large extracellular N-terminus which binds the orthosteric (endogenous) ligand. The shape of this domain is often likened to a clam. Several allosteric ligands to these receptors have been identified and these bind within the seven transmembrane region.
R-HSA-983169	Class I MHC mediated antigen processing & presentation	Major histocompatibility complex (MHC) class I molecules play an important role in cell mediated immunity by reporting on intracellular events such as viral infection, the presence of intracellular bacteria or tumor-associated antigens. They bind peptide fragments of these proteins and presenting them to CD8+ T cells at the cell surface. This enables cytotoxic T cells to identify and eliminate cells that are synthesizing abnormal or foreign proteins. MHC class I is a trimeric complex composed of a polymorphic heavy chain (HC or alpha chain) and an invariable light chain, known as beta2-microglobulin (B2M) plus an 8-10 residue peptide ligand. Represented here are the events in the biosynthesis of MHC class I molecules, including generation of antigenic peptides by the ubiquitin/26S-proteasome system, delivery of these peptides to the endoplasmic reticulum (ER), loading of peptides to MHC class I molecules and display of MHC class I complexes on the cell surface.
R-HSA-428776	Class II GLUTs	Class II facilitative transporters consist of GLUT5, 7, 9 and 11 (Zhao FQ and Keating AF, 2007; Wood IS and Trayhurn P, 2003).
R-HSA-173623	Classical antibody-mediated complement activation	C1, the first component of complement is a complex containing three protein species, C1q, C1r, and C1s. C1q is assembled from six identical subunits each of which consists of three homologous chains (A, B, and C). These chains form a globular domain at the C-terminus, followed by the "neck" and a coil in the "stalk." The six subunits are held together by the collagenous stalk parts (giving rise to the comparison of C1q with a "bunch of six tulips"). The stalks also interact with the [C1s:C1r:C1r:C1s] tetramer assembled in a linear chain. Binding of an antigen to an antibody of the IgM or IgG class induces a conformational change in the Fc domain of the antibody that allows it to bind to the C1q component of C1. C1 activation requires interaction with two separate Fc domains, so pentavalent IgM antibody is far more efficient at complement activation than IgG antibody. Antibody binding results in a conformational change in the C1r component of the C1 complex and a proteolytic cleavage of C1r, activating it. Active C1r then cleaves and activates the C1s component of the C1 complex (Muller-Eberhard 1988).
R-HSA-1296053	Classical Kir channels	Classical Kir channels are inwardly rectifying K+ channels with strong inwardly rectifying currents that contribute to highly negative resting membrane potential, prolonged action potential plateau and rapid repolarization in the final stage of action potential. Classical Kir channels are found in various cells such as cardiac myocytes, purkinje fibers, atrial and ventricular tissues. Rectification is caused by intracellular Mg2+ ions and polyamines.
R-HSA-421837	Clathrin derived vesicle budding	There at least two classes of clathrin coated vesicles in cells, one predominantly Golgi-associated, involved in budding from the trans-Golgi network and the other at the plasma membrane. Here the clathrin-coated vesicles emerging from the Golgi apparatus are triggered by the heterotetrameric adaptor protein complex, AP-1 at the trans-Golgi network membrane. The cargo can be transmembrane, membrane associated or golgi luminal proteins. Each step in the vesicle sculpting pathway, gathers cargo and clathrin triskeletons, until a complete vesicular sphere is formed. With the scission of the membrane the vesicle is released and eventually losses its clathrin coat.
R-HSA-2993913	Clearance of Nuclear Envelope Membranes from Chromatin	In mitotic prophase, chromatin detaches from the nuclear envelope, and this contributes to the nuclear envelope breakdown. VRK1 (and possibly VRK2) mediated phosphorylation of BANF1 (BAF), a protein that simultaneously interacts with DNA, LEM-domain inner nuclear membrane proteins, and lamins (Zheng et al. 2000, Shumaker et al. 2001, Haraguchi et al. 2001, Mansharamani and Wilson 2005, Brachner et al. 2005) is considered to be one of the key steps in the detachment of the nuclear envelope from chromatin (Bengtsson and Wilson 2006, Nichols et al. 2006, Gorjanacz et al. 2007).
R-HSA-109688	Cleavage of Growing Transcript in the Termination Region 	This section includes the cleavage of both polyadenylated and non-polyadenylated transcripts.<p> In the former case polyadenylation has to precede transcript cleavage, while in the latter case there is no polyadenylation.
R-HSA-110331	Cleavage of the damaged purine	Damaged purines are cleaved from the sugar-phosphate backbone by purine-specific glycosylases (Saparbaev and Laval 1994, Lindahl and Wood 1999).
R-HSA-110329	Cleavage of the damaged pyrimidine 	Damaged pyrimidines are cleaved by pyrimide-specific glycosylases (Lindahl and Wood 1999).
R-HSA-5607763	CLEC7A (Dectin-1) induces NFAT activation	CLEC7A (Dectin-1) signals through the classic calcineurin/NFAT pathway through Syk activation phospholipase C-gamma 2 (PLCG2) leading to increased soluble IP3 (inositol trisphosphate). IP3 is able to bind endoplasmic Ca2+ channels, resulting in an influx of Ca2+ into the cytoplasm. This increase in calcium concentration induces calcineurin activation and consequently, dephosphorylation of NFAT and its translocation into the nucleus, triggering gene transcription and extracellular release of Interleukin-2 (Plato et al. 2013, Goodridge et al. 2007, Mourao-Sa et al. 2011).
R-HSA-5607764	CLEC7A (Dectin-1) signaling	CLEC7A (also known as Dectin-1) is a pattern-recognition receptor (PRR) expressed by myeloid cells (macrophages, dendritic cells and neutrophils) that detects pathogens by binding to beta-1,3-glucans in fungal cell walls and triggers direct innate immune responses to fungal and bacterial infections. CLEC7A belongs to thetype-II C-type lectin receptor (CLR) family that can mediate its own intracellular signaling. Upon binding particulate beta-1,3-glucans, CLEC7A mediates intracellular signalling through its cytoplasmic immunoreceptor tyrosine-based activation motif (ITAM)-like motif (Brown 2006). CLEC7A signaling can induce the production of various cytokines and chemokines, including tumour-necrosis factor (TNF), CXC-chemokine ligand 2 (CXCL2, also known as MIP2), interleukin-1beta (IL-1b), IL-2, IL-10 and IL-12 (Brown et al. 2003), it also triggers phagocytosis and stimulates the production of reactive oxygen species (ROS), thus contributing to microbial killing (Gantner et al. 2003, Herre et al. 2004, Underhill et al. 2005, Goodridge at al. 2011, Reid et al. 2009). These cellular responses mediated by CLEC7A rely on both Syk-dependent and Syk-independent signaling cascades. The pathways leading to the Syk-dependent activation of NF-kB can be categorised into both canonical and non-canonical routes (Gringhuis et al. 2009). Activation of the canonical NF-kB pathway is essential for innate immunity, whereas activation of the non-canonical pathway is involved in lymphoid organ development and adaptive immunity (Plato et al. 2013).
R-HSA-5660668	CLEC7A/inflammasome pathway	Antifungal immunity through the induction of T-helper 17 cells (TH17) responses requires the production of mature, active interleukin-1beta (IL1B). CLEC7A (dectin-1) through the SYK route induces activation of NF-kB and transcription of the gene encoding pro-IL1B via the CARD9-BCL10-MALT1 complex as well as the formation and activation of a MALT1-caspase-8-ASC complex that mediated the processing of pro-IL1B. The inactive precursor pro-IL1B has to be processed into mature bioactive form of IL1B and is usually mediated by inflammatory cysteine protease caspase-1. Gringhuis et al. showed that CLEC7A mediated processing of IL1B occurs through two distinct mechanisms: CLEC7A triggering induced a primary noncanonical caspase-8 inflammasome for pro-IL1B processing that was independent of caspase-1 activity, whereas some fungi triggered a second additional mechanism that required activation of the NLRP3/caspase 1 inflammasome. Unlike the canonical caspase-1 inflammasome, CLEC7A mediated noncanonical caspase-8-dependent inflammasome is independent of pathogen internalization. CLEC7A/inflammasome pathway enables the host immune system to mount a protective TH17 response against fungi and bacterial infection (Gringhuis et al. 2012, Cheng et al. 2011).
R-HSA-196741	Cobalamin (Cbl, vitamin B12) transport and metabolism	Vitamin B<sub>12</sub> (cobalamin, Cbl) is a water-soluble vitamin with a key role in blood formation and normal functioning of the brain and nervous system. Cbl consists of a planar corrin ring coordinating with a cobalt atom through four nitrogen atoms. A 5,6-dimethylbenzamidizole base coordinates with the cobalt atom in the lower axial position while a number of different species can coordinate with the cobalt atom in the upper axial position. It is the cobalt-corrin ring complex that gives all Cbls a deep red colour. Only bacteria and archaea are able to synthesise Cbl thus humans need a dietary intake to prevent deficiency (Green 2010, Quadros 2010, Watkins & Rosenblatt 2011). A common semi-synthetic form of the vitamin, cyanocobalamin (CNCbl, where a cyanide group is in the upper axial position), is produced from bacterial hydroxocobalamin and used in many pharmaceuticals, supplements and as a food additive. In mammalian cells, Cbl or CNCbl is converted to two active coenzyme derivatives; methylcobalamin (MetCbl) and adenosylcobalamin (AdoCbl). MetCbl is required for activity of the cytoplasmic enzyme methionine synthase, which converts homocysteine to methionine. AdoCbl is required for activity of the mitochondrial enzyme methylmalonyl CoA mutase, which converts L-methylmalonyl-CoA to succinyl-CoA (Seetharam 1999). This pathway outlines the intake, transport and metabolism of Cbl and is assumed to be equally applicable to CNCbl.
R-HSA-196783	Coenzyme A biosynthesis	Coenzyme A (CoA) is a ubiquitous cofactor that functions as an acyl group carrier in diverse processes including fatty acid metabolism and the TCA cycle (Lipmann 1953). It is synthesized from the vitamin pantothenate in a sequence of five reactions (Daugherty et al. 2002; Leonardi et al. 2005; Robishaw and Neely 1985). These reactions all occur in the cytosol or the mitochondrial intermembrane space (Leonardi et al. 2005). A recently described transport protein appears to mediate the uptake of Coenzyme A into the mitochondrial matrix (Prohl et al. 2001).
R-HSA-2470946	Cohesin Loading onto Chromatin	In mitotic telophase, as chromosomes decondense, cohesin complex associated with PDS5 (PDS5A and PDS5B) and WAPAL (WAPL) proteins is loaded onto chromatin (Shintomi and Hirano, 2009, Kueng et al. 2006, Gandhi et al. 2006, Chan et al. 2012). Cohesin loading is facilitated by the complex of NIPBL (SCC2) and MAU2 (SCC4) proteins, which constitute an evolutionarily conserved cohesin loading complex. MAU2 depletion in HeLa cells results in 2-3-fold reduction in the amount of cohesin in the chromatin fraction (Watrin et al. 2006). NIPBL mutations are the cause of the Cornelia de Lange syndrome, a dominantly inherited disorder characterized by facial malformations, limb defects, and growth and cognitive retardation (Tonkin et al. 2004). Cornelia de Lange syndrome can also be caused by mutations in cohesin subunits SMC1A (Musio et al. 2006, Borck et al. 2007, Deardorff et al. 2007, Pie et al. 2010) and SMC3 (Deardorff et al. 2007).
R-HSA-1650814	Collagen biosynthesis and modifying enzymes	The biosynthesis of collagen is a multistep process. Collagen propeptides are cotranslationally translocated into the ER lumen. Propeptides undergo a number of post-translational modifications. Proline and lysine residues may be hydroxylated by prolyl 3-, prolyl 4- and lysyl hydroxylases. 4-hydroxyproline is essential for intramolecular hydrogen bonding and stability of the triple helical collagenous domain. In fibril forming collagens approximately 50% of prolines are 4-hydroxylated; the extent of this and of 3-hydroxyproline and lysine hydroxylation varies between tissues and collagen types (Kivirikko et al. 1972, 1992). Hydroxylysine molecules can form cross-links between collagen molecules in fibrils, and are sites for glycosyl- and galactosylation. Collagen peptides all have non-collagenous domains; collagens within the subclasses have common chain structures. These non-collagenous domains have regulatory functions; some are biologically active when cleaved from the main peptide chain. Fibrillar collagens all have a large triple helical domain (COL1) bordered by N and C terminal extensions, called the N and C propeptides, which are cleaved prior to formation of the collagen fibril. The C propeptide, also called the NC1 domain, is highly conserved. It directs chain association during intracellular assembly of the procollagen molecule from three collagen propeptide alpha chains (Hulmes 2002). The N-propeptide has a short linker (NC2) connecting the main triple helix to a short minor one (COL2) and a globular N-terminal region NC3. NC3 domains are variable both in size and the domains they contain.<br><br>Collagen propeptides typically undergo a number of post-translational modifications. Proline and lysine residues are hydroxylated by prolyl 3-, prolyl 4- and lysyl hydroxylases. 4-hydroxyproline is essential for intramolecular hydrogen bonding and stability of the triple helical collagenous domain. Prolyl 4-hydroxylase may also have a role in alpha chain association as no association of the C-propeptides of type XII collagen was seen in the presence of prolyl 4-hydroxylase inhibitors (Mazzorana et al. 1993, 1996). In fibril forming collagens approximately 50% of prolines are 4-hydroxylated; the extent of this is species dependent, lower hydroxylation correlating with lower ambient temperature and thermal stability (Cohen-Solal et al. 1986, Notbohm et al. 1992). Similarly the extent of 3-hydroxyproline and lysine hydroxylation varies between tissues and collagen types (Kivirikko et al. 1992). Hydroxylysine molecules can form cross-links between collagen molecules in fibrils, and are sites for glycosyl- and galactosylation.<br><br>Collagen molecules fold and assemble through a series of distinct intermediates (Bulleid 1996). Individual collagen polypeptide chains are translocated co-translationally across the membrane of the endoplasmic reticulum (ER). Intra-chain disulfide bonds are formed within the N-propeptide, and hydroxylation of proline and lysine residues occurs within the triple helical domain (Kivirikko et al. 1992). When the peptide chain is fully translocated into the ER lumen the C-propeptide folds, the conformation being stabilized by intra-chain disulfide bonds (Doege and Fessler 1986). Pro alpha-chains associate via the C-propeptides (Byers et al. 1975, Bachinger et al. 1978), or NC2 domains for FACIT family collagens (Boudko et al. 2008) to form an initial trimer which can be stabilized by the formation of inter-chain disulfide bonds (Schofield et al. 1974, Olsen et al. 1976), though these are not a prerequisite for further folding (Bulleid et al. 1996). The triple helix then nucleates and folds in a C- to N- direction. The association of the individual chains and subsequent triple helix formation are distinct steps (Bachinger et al. 1980). The N-propeptides associate and in some cases form inter-chain disulfide bonds (Bruckner et al., 1978). Procollagen is released via carriers into the exracellular space (Canty & Kadler 2005). Fibrillar procollagens undergo removal of the C- and N-propeptides by procollagen C and N proteinases respectively, both Zn2+ dependent metalloproteinases. Propeptide processing is a required step for normal collagen I and III fibril formation, but collagens can retain some or all of their non-collagenous propeptides. Retained collagen type V and XI N-propeptides contribute to the control of fibril growth by sterically limiting lateral molecule addition (Fichard et al. 1995). Processed fibrillar procollagen is termed tropocollagen, which is considered to be the unit of higher order fibrils and fibres. Tropocollagens of the fibril forming collagens I, II, III, V and XI sponteneously aggregate in vitro in a manner that has been compared with crystallization, commencing with a nucleation event followed by subsequent organized aggregation (Silver et al. 1992, Prockop & Fertala 1998). Fibril formation is stabilized by lysyl oxidase catalyzed crosslinks between adjacent molecules (Siegel & Fu 1976).
R-HSA-1442490	Collagen degradation	Collagen fibril diameter and spatial organisation are dependent on the species, tissue type and stage of development (Parry 1988). The lengths of collagen fibrils in mature tissues are largely unknown but in tendon can be measured in millimetres (Craig et al. 1989). Collagen fibrils isolated from adult bovine corneal stroma had ~350 collagen molecules in transverse section, tapering down to three molecules at the growing tip (Holmes & Kadler 2005). <br><br>The classical view of collagenases is that they actively unwind the triple helical chain, a process termed molecular tectonics (Overall 2002, Bode & Maskos 2003), before preferentially cleaving the alpha2 chain followed by the remaining chains (Chung et al. 2004). More recently it has been suggested that collagen fibrils exist in an equilibrium between protected and vulnerable states (Stultz 2002, Nerenberg & Stultz 2008). The prototypical triple-helical structure of collagen does not fit into the active site of collagenase MMPs. In addition the scissile bonds are not solvent-exposed and are therefore inaccessible to the collagenase active site (Chung et al. 2004, Stultz 2002). It was realized that collagen must locally unfold into non-triple helical regions to allow collagenolysis. Observations using circular dichroism and differential scanning calorimetry confirm that there is considerable heterogeneity along collagen fibres (Makareeva et al. 2008) allowing access for MMPs at physiological temperatures (Salsas-Escat et al. 2010).<br><br>Collagen fibrils with cut chains are unstable and accessible to proteinases that cannot cleave intact collagen strands (Woessner & Nagase 2000, Somerville et al. 2003). Continued degradation leads to the formation of gelatin (Lovejoy et al. 1999). Degradation of collagen types other than I-III is less well characterized but believed to occur in a similar manner. <br><br>Metalloproteinases (MMPs) play a major part in the degradation of several extracellular macromolecules including collagens. MMP1 (Welgus et al. 1981), MMP8 (Hasty et al. 1987), and MMP13 (Knauper et al. 1996), sometimes referred to as collagenases I, II and III respectively, are able to initiate the intrahelical cleavage of the major fibril forming collagens I, II and III at neutral pH, and thus thought to define the rate-limiting step in normal tissue remodeling events. All can cleave additional substrates including other collagen subtypes. Collagenases cut collagen alpha chains at a single conserved Gly-Ile/Leu site approximately 3/4 of the molecule's length from the N-terminus (Fields 1991, Chung et al. 2004). The cleavage site is characterised by the motif G(I/L)(A/L); the G-I/L bond is cleaved. In collagen type I this corresponds to G953-I954 in the Uniprot canonical alpha chain sequences (often given as G775-I776 in literature). It is not clear why only this bond is cleaved, as the motif occurs at several other places in the chain. MMP14, a membrane-associated MMP also known as Membrane-type matrix metalloproteinase 1 (MT-MMP1), is able to cleave collagen types I, II and III (Ohuchi et al. 1997).
R-HSA-1474290	Collagen formation	Collagen is a family of at least 29 structural proteins derived from over 40 human genes (Myllyharju & Kivirikko 2004). It is the main component of connective tissue, and the most abundant protein in mammals making up about 25% to 35% of whole-body protein content. A defining feature of collagens is the formation of trimeric left-handed polyproline II-type helical collagenous regions. The packing within these regions is made possible by the presence of the smallest amino acid, glycine, at every third residue, resulting in a repeating motif Gly-X-Y where X is often proline (Pro) and Y often 4-hydroxyproline (4Hyp). Gly-Pro-Hyp is the most common triplet in collagen (Ramshaw et al. 1998). Collagen peptide chains also have non-collagenous domains, with collagen subclasses having common chain structures. Collagen fibrils are mostly found in fibrous tissues such as tendon, ligament and skin. Other forms of collagen are abundant in cornea, cartilage, bone, blood vessels, the gut, and intervertebral disc. In muscle tissue, collagen is a major component of the endomysium, constituting up to 6% of muscle mass. Gelatin, used in food and industry, is collagen that has been irreversibly hydrolyzed. On the basis of their fibre architecture in tissues, the genetically distinct collagens have been divided into subgroups. Group 1 collagens have uninterrupted triple-helical domains of about 300 nm, forming large extracellular fibrils. They are referred to as the fibril-forming collagens, consisting of collagens types I, II, III, V, XI, XXIV and XXVII. Group 2 collagens are types IV and VII, which have extended triple helices (>350 nm) with imperfections in the Gly-X-Y repeat sequences. Group 3 are the short-chain collagens. These have two subgroups. Group 3A have continuous triple-helical domains (type VI, VIII and X). Group 3B have interrupted triple-helical domains, referred to as the fibril-associated collagens with interrupted triple helices (FACIT collagens, Shaw & Olsen 1991). FACITs include collagen IX, XII, XIV, XVI, XIX, XX, XXI, XXII and XXVI plus the transmembrane collagens (XIII, XVII, XXIII and XXV) and the multiple triple helix domains and interruptions (Multiplexin) collagens XV and XVIII (Myllyharju & Kivirikko 2004). The non-collagenous domains of collagens have regulatory functions; several are biologically active when cleaved from the main peptide chain. Fibrillar collagen peptides all have a large triple helical domain (COL1) bordered by N and C terminal extensions, called the N- and C-propeptides, which are cleaved prior to formation of the collagen fibril. The intact form is referred to as a collagen propeptide, not procollagen, which is used to refer to the trimeric triple-helical precursor of collagen before the propeptides are removed. The C-propeptide, also called the NC1 domain, directs chain association during assembly of the procollagen molecule from its three constituent alpha chains (Hulmes 2002).<br><br>Fibril forming collagens are the most familiar and best studied subgroup. Collagen fibres are aggregates or bundles of collagen fibrils, which are themselves polymers of tropocollagen complexes, each consisting of three polypeptide chains known as alpha chains. Tropocollagens are considered the subunit of larger collagen structures. They are approximately 300 nm long and 1.5 nm in diameter, with a left-handed triple-helical structure, which becomes twisted into a right-handed coiled-coil 'super helix' in the collagen fibril. Tropocollagens in the extracellular space polymerize spontaneously with regularly staggered ends (Hulmes 2002). In fibrillar collagens the molecules are staggered by about 67 nm, a unit known as D that changes depending upon the hydration state. Each D-period contains slightly more than four collagen molecules so that every D-period repeat of the microfibril has a region containing five molecules in cross-section, called the 'overlap', and a region containing only four molecules, called the 'gap'. The triple-helices are arranged in a hexagonal or quasi-hexagonal array in cross-section, in both the gap and overlap regions (Orgel et al. 2006). Collagen molecules cross-link covalently to each other via lysine and hydroxylysine side chains. These cross-links are unusual, occuring only in collagen and elastin, a related protein.<br><br>The macromolecular structures of collagen are diverse. Several group 3 collagens associate with larger collagen fibers, serving as molecular bridges which stabilize the organization of the extracellular matrix. Type IV collagen is arranged in an interlacing network within the dermal-epidermal junction and vascular basement membranes. Type VI collagen forms distinct microfibrils called beaded filaments. Type VII collagen forms anchoring fibrils. Type VIII and X collagens form hexagonal networks. Type XVII collagen is a component of hemidesmosomes where it is complexed wtih alpha6Beta4 integrin, plectin, and laminin-332 (de Pereda et al. 2009). Type XXIX collagen has been recently reported to be a putative epidermal collagen with highest expression in suprabasal layers (Soderhall et al. 2007). Collagen fibrils/aggregates arranged in varying combinations and concentrations in different tissues provide specific tissue properties. In bone, collagen triple helices lie in a parallel, staggered array with 40 nm gaps between the ends of the tropocollagen subunits, which probably serve as nucleation sites for the deposition of crystals of the mineral component, hydroxyapatite (Ca10(PO4)6(OH)2) with some phosphate. Collagen structure affects cell-cell and cell-matrix communication, tissue construction in growth and repair, and is changed in development and disease (Sweeney et al. 2006, Twardowski et al. 2007). A single collagen fibril can be heterogeneous along its axis, with significantly different mechanical properties in the gap and overlap regions, correlating with the different molecular organizations in these regions (Minary-Jolandan & Yu 2009).
R-HSA-140875	Common Pathway of Fibrin Clot Formation	The common pathway consists of the cascade of activation events leading from the formation of activated factor X to the formation of active thrombin, the cleavage of fibrinogen by thrombin, and the formation of cleaved fibrin into a stable multimeric, cross-linked complex. Thrombin also efficiently catalyzes the activation of several factors required earlier in the clotting cascade, thus acting in effect as a positive regulator of clotting. At the same time, thrombin activates protein C, which in turn catalyzes the inactivation of several of these upstream factors, thereby limiting the clotting process. Thrombin can be trapped in stable, inactive complexes with: antithrombin-III (SERPINC1), a circulating blood protein; heparin cofactor II (SERPIND1) which inhibits thrombin in a dermatan sulfatedependent manner in the arterial vasculature; protein C inhibitor (SERPINA5) that inhibits thrombin in complex with thrombomodulin; and Protease nexin-1 (SERPINE2) that inhibits thrombin at the vessel wall and platelet surface. The quantitative interplay among these positive and negative modulators is critical to the normal regulation of clotting, facilitating the rapid formation of a protective clot at the site of injury, while limiting and physically confining the process.<br>These events are outlined in the drawing: black arrows connect the substrates (inputs) and products (outputs) of individual reactions, and blue lines connect output activated enzymes to the other reactions that they catalyze.
R-HSA-166658	Complement cascade	In the complement cascade, a panel of soluble molecules rapidly and effectively senses a danger or damage and triggers reactions to provide a response that discriminates among foreign intruders, cellular debris, healthy and altered host cells (Ricklin D et al. 2010). Complement proteins circulate in the blood stream in functionally inactive states. When triggered the complement cascade generates enzymatically active molecules (such as C3/C5 convertases) and biological effectors: opsonins (C3b, C3d and C4b), anaphylatoxins (C3a and C5a), and C5b, which initiates assembly of the lytic membrane attack complex (MAC). Three branches lead to complement activation: the classical, lectin and alternative pathways (Kang YH et al. 2009; Ricklin D et al. 2010). The classical pathway is initiated by C1 complex binding to immune complexes, pentraxins or other targets such as apoptotic cells leading to cleavage of C4 and C2 components and formation of the classical C3 convertase, C4bC2a. The lectin pathway is activated by binding of mannan-binding lectin (MBL) to repetitive carbohydrate residues, or by binding of ficolins to carbohydrate or acetylated groups on target surfaces. MBL and ficolins interact with MBL-associated serine proteases (MASP) leading to cleavage of C4 and C2 and formation of the classical C3 convertase, C4bC2a. The alternative pathway is spontaneously activated by the hydrolysis of the internal thioester group of C3 to give C3(H2O). Alternative pathway activation involves interaction of C3(H2O) and/or previously generated C3b with factor B, which is cleaved by factor D to generate the alternative C3 convertases C3(H2O)Bb and/or C3bBb. All three pathways merge at the proteolytic cleavage of component C3 by C3 convertases to form opsonin C3b and anaphylatoxin C3a. C3b covalently binds to glycoproteins scattered across the target cell surface. This is followed by an amplification reaction that generates additional C3 convertases and deposits more C3b at the local site. C3b can also bind to C3 convertases switching them to C5 convertases, which mediate C5 cleavage leading to MAC formation. Thus, the activation of the complement system leads to several important outcomes:<ul><li>opsonization of target cells to enhance phagocytosis,</li><li>lysis of target cells via membrane attack complex (MAC) assembly on the cell surface,</li><li>production of anaphylatoxins C3a/C5a involved in the host inflammatory response,</li><li>C5a-mediated leukocyte chemotaxis,</li><li>and clearance of antibody-antigen complexes.</li></ul><br>The complement system is able to distinguish between pathological and physiological challenges, i.e. the outcomes of complement activation are predetermined by the trigger and are tightly tuned by a combination of initiation events with several regulatory mechanisms. These regulatory mechanisms use soluble (e.g., C4BP, CFI and CFH) and membrane-bound regulators (e.g., CR1, CD46(MCP), CD55(DAF) and CD59) and are coordinated by complement receptors such as CR1, CR2, etc.<p>In response to microbial infection complement activation results in flagging microorganisms with opsonins for facilitated phagocytosis, formation of MAC on cells such as Gram-negative bacteria leading to cell lysis, and release of C3a and C5a to stimulate downstream immune responses and to attract leukocytes. Most pathogens can be eliminated by these complement-mediated host responses, though some pathogenic microorganisms have developed ways of avoiding complement recognition or blocking host complement attack resulting in greater virulence (Lambris JD et al. 2008; Serruto D et al. 2010).<p>All three complement pathways (classical, lectin and alternative) have been implicated in clearance of dying cells (Mevorach D et al. 1998; Ogden CA et al. 2001; Gullstrand B et al.2009; Kemper C et al. 2008). Altered surfaces of apoptotic cells are recognized by complement proteins leading to opsonization and subsequent phagocytosis. In contrast to pathogens, apoptotic cells are believed to induce only a limited complement activation by allowing opsonization of altered surfaces but restricting the terminal pathway of MAC formation (Gershov D et al. 2000; Braunschweig A and Jozsi M 2011). Thus, opsonization facilitates clearance of dying cells and cell debris without triggering danger signals and further inflammatory responses (Fraser DA et al. 2007, 2009; Benoit ME et al. 2012). C1q-mediated complement activation by apoptotic cells has been shown in a variety of human cells: keratinocytes, human umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVEC), Jurkat T lymphoblastoid cells, lung adenocarcinoma cells (Korb LC and Ahearn JM 1997; Mold C and Morris CA 2001; Navratil JS et al. 2001; Nauta AJ et al. 2004). In addition to C1q the opsonization of apoptotic Jurkat T cells with MBL also facilitated clearance of these cells by both dendritic cells (DC) and macrophages (Nauta AJ et al. 2004). Also C3b, iC3b and C4b deposition on apoptotic cells as a consequence of activation of the complement cascade may promote complement-mediated phagocytosis. C1q, MBL and cleavage fragments of C3/C4 can bind to several receptors expressed on macrophages (e.g. cC1qR (calreticulin), CR1, CR3, CR4) suggesting a potential clearance mechanism through this interaction (Mevorach D et al. 1998; Ogden CA et al. 2001). Apoptosis is also associated with an altered expression of complement regulators on the surface of apoptotic cells. CD46 (MCP) bound to the plasma membrane of a healthy cell protects it from complement-mediated attack by preventing deposition of C3b and C4b, and reduced expression of CD46 on dying cells may lead to enhanced opsonization (Elward K et al. 2005). Upregulation of CD55 (DAF) and CD59 on apoptotic cell surfaces may protect damaged cells against complement mediated lysis (Pedersen ED et al. 2007; Iborra A et al. 2003; Hensel F et al. 2001). In addition, fluid-phase complement regulators such as C4BP, CFH may also inhibit lysis of apoptotic cells by limiting complement activation (Trouw LA et al 2007; Braunschweig A and Jozsi M. 2011).<p>Complement facilitates the clearance of immune complexes (IC) from the circulation (Chevalier J and Kazatchkine MD 1989; Nielsen CH et al. 1997). Erythrocytes bear clusters of complement receptor 1 (CR1 or CD35), which serves as an immune adherence receptor for C3 and/or C4 fragments deposited on IC that are shuttled to liver and spleen, where IC are transferred and processed by tissue macrophages through an Fc receptor-mediated process.<p>Complement proteins are always present in the blood and a small percentage spontaneously activate. Inappropriate activation leads to host cell damage, so on healthy human cells any complement activation or amplification is strictly regulated by surface-bound regulators that accelerate decay of the convertases (CR1, CD55), act as a cofactor for the factor I (CFI)-mediated degradation of C3b and C4b (CR1, CD46), or prevent the formation of MAC (CD59). Soluble regulators such as C4BP, CFH and FHL1 recognize self surface pattern-like glycosaminoglycans and further impair activation.<p>Complement components interact with other biological systems. Upon microbial infection complement acts in cooperation with Toll-like receptors (TLRs) to amplify innate host defense. Anaphylatoxin C5a binds C5a receptor (C5aR) resulting in a synergistic enhancement of the TLR and C5aR-mediated proinflammatory cytokine response to infection. This interplay is negatively modulated by co-ligation of TLR and the second C5a receptor, C5L2, suggesting the existence of complex immunomodulatory interactions (Kohl J 2006; Hajishengallis G and Lambris JD 2010). In addition to C5aR and C5L2, complement receptor 3 (CR3) facilitates TLR2 or TLR4 signaling pathways by promoting a recruitment of their sorting adaptor TIRAP (MAL) to the receptor complex (van Bruggen R et al. 2007; Kagan JC and Medzhitov R 2006). Complement may activate platelets or facilitate biochemical and morphological changes in the endothelium potentiating coagulation and contributing to homeostasis in response to injury (Oikonomopoulou K et al. 2012). The interplay of complement and coagulation also involves cleavage of C3 and C5 convertases by coagulation proteases, generating biologically active anaphylatoxins (Amara U et al. 2010). Complement is believed to link the innate response to both humoral and cell-mediated immunity (Toapanta FR and Ross TM 2006; Mongini PK et al. 1997). The majority of published data is based on experiments using mouse as a model organism. Further characterization of the influence of complement on B or T cell activation is required for the human system, since differences between murine models and the human system are not yet fully determined. Complement is also involved in regulation of mobilization and homing of hematopoietic stem/progenitor cells (HSPCs) from bone marrow to the circulation and peripheral tissue in order to accommodate blood cell replenishment (Reca R et al. 2006).<p>Thus, the complement system orchestrates the host defense by sensing a danger signal and transmitting it into specific cellular responses while extensively communicating with associated biological pathways ranging from immunity and inflammation to homeostasis and development.<br><br>N.B. Originally the larger fragment of Complement Factor 2 (C2) was designated C2a. However, complement scientists decided that the smaller of all C fragments should be designated with an 'a', the larger with a 'b', changing the nomenclature for C2. Recent literature may use the updated nomenclature and refer to the larger C2 fragment as C2b, and refer to the classical C3 convertase as C4bC2b. Throughout this pathway Reactome adheres to the original convention to agree with the current (Sep 2013) Uniprot names for C2 fragments.
R-HSA-2514853	Condensation of Prometaphase Chromosomes	The condensin I complex is evolutionarily conserved and consists of five subunits: two SMC (structural maintenance of chromosomes) family subunits, SMC2 and SMC4, and three non-SMC subunits, NCAPD2, NCAPH and NCAPG. The stoichiometry of the complex is 1:1:1:1:1 (Hirano and Mitchinson 1994, Hirano et al. 1997, Kimura et al. 2001). SMC2 and SMC4 subunits, shared between condensin I and condensin II, are DNA-dependent ATPases, and condensins are able to introduce positive supercoils into DNA in an ATP-dependent manner (Kimura and Hirano 1997). <br><br>Protein levels of condensin subunits are constant during the cell cycle, however condensins are enriched on mitotic chromosomes. Four of the five subunits, SMC4, NCAPD2, NCAPG and NCAPH, are phosphorylated in both mitotic and interphase HeLa cells, but on different sites (Takemoto et al. 2004). CDK1 (CDC2) in complex with CCNB (cyclin B) phosphorylates NCAPD2, NCAPG and NCAPH in mitosis (Kimura et al. 1998, Kimura et al. 2001, Takemoto et al. 2006, Murphy et al. 2008), but other mitotic kinases, such as PLK1 (St-Pierre et al. 2009), and other post-translational modifications, such as acetylation, may also be involved (reviewed by Bazile et al. 2010). Global proteomic analysis of human cell lines has identified N6-acetylation of lysine residues in condensin subunits SMC2, SMC4 and NCAPH (Choudhary et al. 2009). Another high throughput proteomic study showed that condensin I subunits NCAPD2 and NCAPH are phosphorylated upon DNA damage, probably by ATM or ATR kinase (Matsuoka et al. 2007).<br><br> As condensin I is cytosolic, it gains access to chromosomes only after the nuclear envelope breakdown at the start of prometaphase (Ono et al. 2004). Condensin I, activated by CDK1-mediated phosphorylation, promotes hypercondensation of chromosomes that were condensed in prophase through the action of condensin II (Hirota et al. 2004). AURKB may also regulate association of condensin I complex with chromatin (Lipp et al. 2007). Protein phosphatase PP2A acts independently of its catalytic activity to target condensin II complex to chromatin, but does not interact with condensin I (Takemoto et al. 2009). Full activation of condensin I requires dephosphorylation of sites modified by CK2 during interphase (Takemoto et al. 2006). Besides being essential for chromosome condensation in mitosis, condensin I may also contribute to cohesin removal from chromosome arms in prometaphase, but the exact mechanism is not known (Hirota et al. 2004).
R-HSA-2299718	Condensation of Prophase Chromosomes	In mitotic prophase, the action of the condensin II complex enables initial chromosome condensation.<br><br>The condensin II complex subunit NCAPD3 binds monomethylated histone H4 (H4K20me1), thereby associating with chromatin (Liu et al. 2010). Binding of the condensin II complex to chromatin is partially controlled by the presence of RB1 (Longworth et al. 2008). <br><br>Two mechanisms contribute to the accumulation of H4K20me1 at mitotic entry. First, the activity of SETD8 histone methyltransferase peaks at G2/M transition (Nishioka et al. 2002, Rice et al. 2002, Wu et al. 2010). Second, the complex of CDK1 and cyclin B1 (CDK1:CCNB1) phosphorylates PHF8 histone demethylase at the start of mitosis, removing it from chromatin (Liu et al. 2010).<br><br>Condensin II complex needs to be phosphorylated by the CDK1:CCNB1 complex, and then phosphorylated by PLK1, in order to efficiently condense prophase chromosomes (Abe et al. 2011). 
R-HSA-177135	Conjugation of benzoate with glycine	Benzoic acid, widely used as a food preservative, is converted to hippuric acid by activation and conjugation with glycine. This was one of the first detoxification pathways discovered, and was formerly exploited clinically as an alternative means of nitrogen excretion in patients with urea cycle defects (Brusilow and Horwich 2001).
R-HSA-159424	Conjugation of carboxylic acids	Xenobiotics and endogenous compounds containing carboxylate groups can be activated with coenzyme A to produce acyl-CoA thioesters and then conjugated with the amino groups of glycine or glutamine to form amide-linked conjugates. Clinically important substrates include benzoic acid, phenylacetic acid, and salicylic acid.
R-HSA-177162	Conjugation of phenylacetate with glutamine	Phenylacetate metabolism is of clinical importance because its conjugation with glutamine to form phenylacetylglutamine, which can be excreted in the urine, provides an alternative pathway for nitrogen excretion in patients with urea cycle defects (James et al. 1972; Batshaw et al. 2001; Brusilow and Horwich 2001). This conjugation proceeds in two steps. First, phenylacetate and ATP react with coenzyme A to form phenylacetyl CoA, AMP, and pyrophosphate (Vessey et al. 1999). Two human CoA ligases have been characterized that catalyze this reaction efficiently in vitro: acyl-CoA synthetase medium-chain family member 1 (BUCS1) (Fujino et al. 2001) and xenobiotic/medium-chain fatty acid:CoA ligase (Vessey et al. 2003). Their relative contributions to phenylacetate metabolism in vivo are unknown. Second, phenylacetyl CoA and glutamine react to form phenyacetyl glutamine and Coenzyme A. The enzyme that catalyzes this reaction has been purified from human liver mitochondria and shown to be a distinct polypeptide species from glycine-N-acyltransferase (Webster et al. 1976). This human glutamine-N-acyltransferase activity has not been characterized by sequence analysis at the protein or DNA level, however, and thus cannot be associated with a known human protein in the annotation of phenylacetate conjugation.
R-HSA-177128	Conjugation of salicylate with glycine	In the body, aspirin (acetylsalicylic acid) is hydrolyzed to salicylic acid. Salicylic acid (2-hydroxybenzoic acid) can then be hydroxylated to yield gentisic acid, conjugated with glucuronate, or conjugated with glycine to yield molecules that are excreted by the kidneys. The third of these conjugation processes is annotated here, and proceeds in two steps. First, salicylate and ATP react with coenzyme A to form salicylate CoA, AMP, and pyrophosphate in a reaction catalyzed by xenobiotic/medium-chain fatty acid:CoA ligase (Vessey et al. 2003). Second, salicylate CoA and glycine react to form salicyluric acid and Coenzyme A (Mawal and Qureshi 1994).
R-HSA-2219530	Constitutive Signaling by Aberrant PI3K in Cancer	Signaling by PI3K/AKT is frequently constitutively activated in cancer via gain-of-function mutations in one of the two PI3K subunits - PI3KCA (encoding the catalytic subunit p110alpha) or PIK3R1 (encoding the regulatory subunit p85alpha). Gain-of-function mutations activate PI3K signaling by diverse mechanisms. Mutations affecting the helical domain of PIK3CA and mutations affecting nSH2 and iSH2 domains of PIK3R1 impair inhibitory interactions between these two subunits while preserving their association. Mutations in the catalytic domain of PIK3CA enable the kinase to achieve an active conformation. PI3K complexes with gain-of-function mutations therefore produce PIP3 and activate downstream AKT in the absence of growth factors (Huang et al. 2007, Zhao et al. 2005, Miled et al. 2007, Horn et al. 2008, Sun et al. 2010, Jaiswal et al. 2009, Zhao and Vogt 2010, Urick et al. 2011).
R-HSA-5674400	Constitutive Signaling by AKT1 E17K in Cancer	While AKT1 gene copy number, expression level and phosphorylation are often increased in cancer, only one low frequency point mutation has been repeatedly reported in cancer and functionally studied. This mutation represents a substitution of a glutamic acid residue with lysine at position 17 of AKT1, and acts by enabling AKT1 to bind PIP2. PIP2-bound AKT1 is phosphorylated by TORC2 complex and by PDPK1 that is always present at the plasma membrane, due to low affinity for PIP2. Therefore, E17K substitution abrogates the need for PI3K in AKT1 activation (Carpten et al. 2007, Landgraf et al. 2008).
R-HSA-5637810	Constitutive Signaling by EGFRvIII	In glioblastoma, the most prevalent EGFR mutation, present in ~25% of tumors, is the deletion of the ligand binding domain of EGFR, accompanied with amplification of the mutated allele, which results in over-expression of the mutant protein known as EGFRvIII. EGFRvIII mutant is not able to bind a ligand, but dimerizes and autophosphorylates spontaneously and is therefore constitutively active (Fernandes et al. 2001). Point mutations in the extracellular domain of EGFR are also frequently found in glioblastoma, but ligand binding ability and responsiveness are preserved (Lee et al. 2006). <br>Similar to EGFR kinase domain mutants, EGFRvIII mutant needs to maintain association with the chaperone heat shock protein 90 (HSP90) for proper functioning (Shimamura et al. 2005, Lavictoire et al. 2003). CDC37 is a co-chaperone of HSP90 that acts as a scaffold and regulator of interaction between HSP90 and its protein kinase clients. CDC37 is frequently over-expressed in cancers involving mutant kinases and acts as an oncogene (Roe et al. 2004, reviewed by Gray Jr. et al. 2008). <br>Expression of EGFRvIII mutant results in aberrant activation of downstream signaling cascades, namely RAS/RAF/MAP kinase signaling and PI3K/AKT signaling, and possibly signaling by PLCG1, which leads to increased cell proliferation and survival, providing selective advantage to cancer cells that harbor EGFRvIII (Huang et al. 2007). <br> EGFRvIII mutant does not autophosorylate on the tyrosine residue Y1045, a docking site for CBL, and is therefore unable to recruit CBL ubiquitin ligase, which enables it to escape degradation (Han et al. 2006)
R-HSA-1236382	Constitutive Signaling by Ligand-Responsive EGFR Cancer Variants	Signaling by EGFR is frequently activated in cancer through activating mutations in the coding sequence of the EGFR gene, resulting in expression of a constitutively active mutant protein. <br><br>Epidermal growth factor receptor kinase domain mutants are present in ~16% of non-small-cell lung cancers (NSCLCs), but are also found in other cancer types, such as breast cancer, colorectal cancer, ovarian cancer and thyroid cancer. EGFR kinase domain mutants harbor activating mutations in exons 18-21 which code for the kinase domain (amino acids 712-979) . Small deletions, insertions or substitutions of amino acids within the kinase domain lock EGFR in its active conformation in which the enzyme can dimerize and undergo autophosphorylation spontaneously, without ligand binding (although ligand binding ability is preserved), and activate downstream signaling pathways that promote cell survival (Greulich et al. 2005, Zhang et al. 2006, Yun et al. 2007, Red Brewer et al. 2009). <br><br>Point mutations in the extracellular domain of EGFR are frequently found in glioblastoma. Similar to kinase domain mutations, point mutations in the extracellular domain result in constitutively active EGFR proteins that signal in the absence of ligands, but ligand binding ability and responsiveness are preserved (Lee et al. 2006). <br><br>EGFR kinase domain mutants need to maintain association with the chaperone heat shock protein 90 (HSP90) for proper functioning (Shimamura et al. 2005, Lavictoire et al. 2003). CDC37 is a co-chaperone of HSP90 that acts as a scaffold and regulator of interaction between HSP90 and its protein kinase clients. CDC37 is frequently over-expressed in cancers involving mutant kinases and acts as an oncogene (Roe et al. 2004, reviewed by Gray Jr. et al. 2008). <br><br>Over-expression of the wild-type EGFR or EGFR cancer mutants results in aberrant activation of downstream signaling cascades, namely RAS/RAF/MAP kinase signaling and PI3K/AKT signaling, and possibly signaling by PLCG1, which leads to increased cell proliferation and survival, providing selective advantage to cancer cells that harbor activating mutations in the EGFR gene (Sordella et al. 2004, Huang et al. 2007). <br><br>While growth factor activated wild-type EGFR is promptly down-regulated by internalization and degradation, cancer mutants of EGFR demonstrate prolonged activation (Lynch et al. 2004). Association of HSP90 with EGFR kinase domain mutants negatively affects CBL-mediated ubiquitination, possibly through decreasing the affinity of EGFR kinase domain mutants for phosphorylated CBL, so that CBL dissociates from the complex upon phosphorylation and cannot perform ubiquitination (Yang et al. 2006, Padron et al. 2007). <br><br>Various molecular therapeutics are being developed to target aberrantly activated EGFR in cancer. Non-covalent (reversible) small tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs), such as gefitinib and erlotinib, selectively bind kinase domain of EGFR, competitively inhibiting ATP binding and subsequent autophosphorylation of EGFR dimers. EGFR kinase domain mutants sensitive to non-covalent TKIs exhibit greater affinity for TKIs than ATP compared with the wild-type EGFR protein, and are therefore preferential targets of non-covalent TKI therapeutics (Yun et al. 2007). EGFR proteins that harbor point mutations in the extracellular domain also show sensitivity to non-covalent tyrosine kinase inhibitors (Lee et al. 2006). EGFR kinase domain mutants harboring small insertions in exon 20 or a secondary T790M mutation are resistant to reversible TKIs (Balak et al. 2006) due to increased affinity for ATP (Yun et al. 2008), and are targets of covalent (irreversible) TKIs that form a covalent bond with EGFR cysteine residue C397. However, effective concentrations of covalent TKIs also inhibit wild-type EGFR, causing severe side effects (Zhou et al. 2009). Hence, covalent TKIs have not shown much promise in clinical trials (Reviewed by Pao and Chmielecki in 2010). 
R-HSA-2691232	Constitutive Signaling by NOTCH1 HD Domain Mutants	The heterodimerization (HD) domain of NOTCH1, responsible for association of NOTCH1 extracellular and transmembrane regions after furin-mediated cleavage of NOTCH1 precursor, is one of the hotspots for gain-of-function NOTCH1 mutations in T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia (T-ALL) (Weng et al. 2004). NOTCH1 HD domain mutants are responsive to ligand binding, but the activation (through cleavage of S2 and S3 sites and release of the intracellular domain NICD1) also happens spontaneously, in the absence of DLL and JAG ligands (Malecki et al. 2006). The following NOTCH1 HD domain mutants were directly functionally studied by Malecki et al.: NOTCH1 V1576E, NOTCH1 F1592S, NOTCH1 L1593P, NOTCH1 L1596H, NOTCH1 R1598P, NOTCH1 I1616N, NOTCH1 I1616T, NOTCH1 V1676D, NOTCH1 L1678P, NOTCH1 I1680N, NOTCH1 A1701P and NOTCH1 I1718T; other frequent NOTCH1 HD domain mutants (NOTCH1 L1574P, NOTCH1 L1574Q and NOTCH1 L1600P) are assumed to behave in a similar way. 
R-HSA-2894862	Constitutive Signaling by NOTCH1 HD+PEST Domain Mutants	When found in cis, HD and PEST domain mutations act synergistically, increasing NOTCH1 transcriptional activity up to ~40-fold, compared with up to ~10-fold and up to ~2-fold increase with HD mutations alone and PEST domain mutations alone, respectively (Weng et al. 2004). HD domain mutations enable spontaneous, ligand-independent, proteolytic release of the NICD1 fragment, although mutants remain responsive to ligand binding (Malecki et al. 2006), while PEST domain mutations prolong NICD1 half-life and transcriptional activity through interference with FBXW7 (FBW7)-mediated ubiquitination and degradation (Thompson et al. 2007, O'Neil et al. 2007). NOTCH1 HD+PEST domain mutants annotated here are NOTCH1 L1600P;P2514Rfs*4, NOTCH1 L1600P;Q2440*, NOTCH1 L1600P;Q2395* and NOTCH1 L1574P;P2474Afs*4. 
R-HSA-2644606	Constitutive Signaling by NOTCH1 PEST Domain Mutants	As NOTCH1 PEST domain is intracellular, NOTCH1 PEST domain mutants are expected to behave as the wild-type NOTCH1 with respect to ligand binding and proteolytic cleavage mediated activation of signaling. However, once the NICD1 fragment of NOTCH1 is released, PEST domain mutations prolong its half-life and transcriptional activity through interference with FBXW7 (FBW7)-mediated ubiquitination and degradation of NICD1 (Weng et al. 2004, Thompson et al. 2007, O'Neil et al. 2007). All NOTCH1 PEST domain mutants annotated here (NOTCH1 Q2395*, NOTCH1 Q2440*, NOTCH1 P2474Afs*4 and NOTCH1 P2514Rfs*4) either have a truncated PEST domain or lack the PEST domain completely.
R-HSA-2660826	Constitutive Signaling by NOTCH1 t(7;9)(NOTCH1:M1580_K2555) Translocation Mutant	NOTCH1 t(7;9)(NOTCH1:M1580_K2555) mutant is expressed in a small subset of T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia (T-ALL) patients. This mutant protein results from a translocation that joins a portion of intron 24 of the NOTCH1 gene to the promoter sequence of T-cell receptor beta (TCRB), leading to overexpression of a truncated NOTCH1 protein in T-cells and their precursors. The truncated NOTCH1 contains amino acids 1580 to 2555 of the wild-type NOTCH1, lacking almost the entire extracellular domain, including EGF and LIN12 repeats (Ellisen et al. 1991). As EGF repeats are needed for NOTCH1 interaction with its ligands (DLL1, DLL4, JAG1, JAG2), the mutant NOTCH1 t(7;9)(NOTCH1:M1580_K2555) does not bind a ligand. The constitutive activity of NOTCH1 t(7;9)(NOTCH1:M1580_K2555) is based on its constitutive proteolytic processing into NOTCH1 intracellular domain (NICD1) by ADAM10/17 protease and gamma-secretase complex, as proteolytic cleavage sites are exposed in the absence of ligand binding in the mutant protein. Constitutively produced NICD1 accumulates in the nucleus, leading to aberrant activation of NOTCH1 target genes which play important roles in the development of T lymphocytes (Washburn et al. 1997. Radtke et al. 1999, Maillard et al. 2004, Sambandam et al. 2005, Tan et al. 2005). Infection of bone marrow cells with recombinant retroviruses that code for truncated NOTCH1 that resembles t(7;9)(NOTCH1:M1580_K2555) resulted in T-ALL-like illness in a portion of mice that received the infected bone-marrow transplant, with all tumors overexpressing truncated forms of NOTCH1 (Pear et al. 1996). 
R-HSA-176407	Conversion from APC/C:Cdc20 to APC/C:Cdh1 in late anaphase	The activity of the APC/C must be appropriately regulated during the cell cycle to ensure the timely degradation of its substrates. Of particular importance is the conversion from APC/C:Cdc20 to APC/C:Cdh1 in late anaphase. Phosphorylation of both the APC/C complex and Cdh1 regulate this conversion. During mitosis, several APC/C subunits are phosphorylated increasing the activity of APC/C:Cdc20. However, phosphorylation of Cdh1 by mitotic Cyclin:Cdk complexes prevents it from activating the APC/C. Dephosphorylation of Cdh1 in late anaphase by Cdc14a results in the activation of APC/C:Cdh1 (reviewed in Castro et al, 2005).
R-HSA-389958	Cooperation of Prefoldin and TriC/CCT  in actin and tubulin folding	In the case of actin and tubulin folding, and perhaps other substrates, the emerging polypeptide chain is transferred from the ribosome to TRiC via Prefoldin (Vainberg et al., 1998). 
R-HSA-199997	COPI Mediated Transport	Secretory transport depends on membrane-bounded carriers to move protein and lipid between intracellular compartments. The COPI coat has a central role in this process, creating a sorting domain on the membrane into which cargo proteins, destined to return to the endoplasmic reticulum (ER), concentrate. The membrane domain deforms into a coated bud, pinches off the membrane as a coated carrier, and then uncoats. Successful operation of the COPI coat system is necessary for selective retrieval of protein and lipid components back to the ER.
R-HSA-204005	COPII (Coat Protein 2) Mediated Vesicle Transport	COPII components (known as Sec13p, Sec23p, Sec24p, Sec31p, and Sar1p in yeast) traffic cargo from the endoplasmic reticulum to the ER-Golgi intermediate compartment (ERGIC). COPII-coated vesicles were originally discovered in the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae using genetic approaches coupled with a cell-free assay. The mammalian counterpart of this pathway is represented here. Newly synthesized proteins destined for secretion are sorted into COPII-coated vesicles at specialized regions of the ER. These vesicles leave the ER, become uncoated and subsequently fuse with the ERGIC membrane.
R-HSA-388841	Costimulation by the CD28 family	Optimal activation of T-lymphocytes requires at least two signals. A primary one is delivered by the T-cell receptor (TCR) complex after antigen recognition and additional costimulatory signals are delivered by the engagement of costimulatory receptors such as CD28. The best-characterized costimulatory pathways are mediated by a set of cosignaling molecules belonging to the CD28 superfamily, including CD28, CTLA4, ICOS, PD1 and BTLA receptors. These proteins deliver both positive and negative second signals to T-cells by interacting with B7 family ligands expressed on antigen presenting cells. Different subsets of T-cells have very different requirements for costimulation. CD28 family mediated costimulation is not required for all T-cell responses in vivo, and alternative costimulatory pathways also exist. Different receptors of the CD28 family and their ligands have different regulation of expression. CD28 is constitutively expressed on naive T cells whereas CTLA4 expression is dependent on CD28/B7 engagement and the other receptor members ICOS, PD1 and BTLA are induced after initial T-cell stimulation. <br>The positive signals induced by CD28 and ICOS molecules are counterbalanced by other members of the CD28 family, including cytotoxic T-lymphocyte associated antigen (CTLA)4, programmed cell death (PD)1, and B and T lymphocyte attenuator (BTLA), which dampen immune responses. The balance of stimulatory and inhibitory signals is crucial to maximize protective immune responses while maintaining immunological tolerance and preventing autoimmunity. <br>The costimulatory receptors CD28, CTLA4, ICOS and PD1 are composed of single extracellular IgV-like domains, whereas BTLA has one IgC-like domain. Receptors CTLA4, CD28 and ICOS are covalent homodimers, due to an interchain disulphide linkage. The costimulatory ligands B71, B72, B7H2, B7H1 and B7DC, have a membrane proximal IgC-like domain and a membrane distal IgV-like domain that is responsible for receptor binding and dimerization. CD28 and CTLA4 have no known intrinsic enzymatic activity. Instead, engagement by their physiologic ligands B71 and B72 leads to the physical recruitment and activation of downstream T-cell effector molecules.
R-HSA-140180	COX reactions	Arachidonic acid (AA) is a 20 carbon unsaturated fatty acid which is present in the lipid bilayer of all mammalian cells. AA is released from the membrane by phospholipases, thus making it available for conversion to bioactive lipids. The cyclooxygenase pathway is one of three pathways (the others being lipoxygenase and P450 monooxygenase pathways) that perform this conversion.\n\nThe enzyme that acts in the cyclooxygenase pathway is called cyclooxygenase (COX) or prostaglandin H synthase (PGHS). PGHS exhibits a dual catalytic activity, a cyclooxygenase and a peroxidase. The cyclooxygenase catalyzes the initial conversion of AA to an intermediate, prostaglandin G2 (PGG2) whilst the peroxidase converts PGG2 to prostaglandin H2 (PGH2) via a two-electron reduction. PGH2 is the intermediate for products that play critical roles in immune function regulation, kidney development and mucosal integrity of the GI tract.\n\nPGHS exists in two isoforms, 1 and 2 and both forms can perform the above reactions. Form 1 is constitutively expressed in most tissues and is involved in performing normal physiological functions. Form 2, in contrast, is inducible and is involved in critical steps of rheumatic disease, inflammation and tumorigenesis.
R-HSA-71288	Creatine metabolism	In humans, creatine is synthesized primarily in the liver and kidney, from glycine, arginine, and S-adenosylmethionine, in a sequence of two reactions. From the liver, creatine is exported to tissues such as skeletal muscle and brain, where it undergoes phosphorylation and serves as a short-term energy store. The mechanism by which creatine leaves producer tissues is unclear, but its uptake by consumer tissues is mediated by the SLC6A8 transporter.<P>Once formed, phosphocreatine undergoes a slow spontaneous reaction to form creatinine, which is excreted from the body.
R-HSA-166786	Creation of C4 and C2 activators	Two pathways lead to a complex capable of activating C4 and C2.<br><br>The classical pathway is triggered by activation of the C1-complex, which consists of hexameric molecule C1q and a tetramer comprising two C1r and two C1s serine proteinases. This occurs when C1q binds to IgM or IgG complexed with antigens, a single IgM can initiate the pathway while multiple IgGs are needed, or when C1q binds directly to the surface of the pathogen. Binding leads to conformational changes in C1q, activating the serine protease activity of C1r, which then cleaves C1s, another serine protease. The C1r:C1s component is now capable of splitting C4 and C2 to produce the classical C3-convertase C4b2a. C1r and C1s are additionally controlled by C1-inhibitor.(Kerr MA 1980)<br>The lectin pathway is similar in operation but has different components. <p>Mannose-binding lectin (MBL) or ficolins (L-ficolin, M-ficolin and H-ficolin) initiate the lectin pathway cascade by binding to specific carbohydrate patterns on pathogenic cell surfaces. MBL and ficolins circulate in plasma in complexes with homodimers of MBL-associated serine proteases (MASP) (Fujita et al. 2004; Hajela et al. 2002). Upon binding of human lectin (MBL or ficolins) to the target surface the complex of lectin:MASP undergoes conformational changes, which results in the activation of MASPs by cleavage (Matsushita M et al. 2000; Fujita et al. 2004). Activated MASPs become capable of C4 and C2 cleavage, giving rise to the same C3 convertase C4b:C2a as the classical pathway. 
R-HSA-199920	CREB phosphorylation	Nerve growth factor (NGF) activates multiple signalling pathways that mediate the phosphorylation of CREB at the critical regulatory site, serine 133. CREB phosphorylation at serine 133 is a crucial event in neurotrophin signalling, being mediated by ERK/RSK, ERK/MSK1 and p38/MAPKAPK2 pathways. Several kinases, such as MSK1, RSK1/2/3 (MAPKAPK1A/B/C), and MAPKAPK2, are able to directly phosphorylate CREB at S133. MSK1 is also able to activate ATF (Cyclic-AMP-dependent transcription factor). However, the NGF-induced CREB phosphorylation appears to correlate better with activation of MSK1 rather than RSK1/2/3, or MAPKAPK2. In retrograde signalling, activation of CREB occurs within 20 minutes after neurotrophin stimulation of distal axons.
R-HSA-442720	CREB phosphorylation through the activation of Adenylate Cyclase	Ca2+ signal generated through NMDA receptor in the post-synaptic neuron activates adenylate cyclase signal transduction, leading to the activation of PKA and phosphorylation and activation of CREB-induced transcription. The isoforms of adenylate cyclase that are activated by Ca2+ in the brain are I, III and IX.
R-HSA-442729	CREB phosphorylation through the activation of CaMKII	Ca2+ signal generated through NMDA receptor in the post-synaptic neuron activates adenylate cyclase signal transduction, leading to the activation of PKA and phosphorylation and activation of CREB-induced transcription. The isoforms of adenylate cyclase that are activated by Ca2+ in the brain are I, III and IX.
R-HSA-442717	CREB phosphorylation through the activation of CaMKK	Transient increase in intracellular Ca2+ concentration after NMDA receptor activation leads to the activation of the CaMKIV via the activation of CaM-kinase kinase. CaM-kinase kinase and CaMKIV are both activated upon binding Ca2+/Calmodulin after Ca2+ influx through activated NMDA receptor.
R-HSA-442742	CREB phosphorylation through the activation of Ras	Ca2+ influx through the NMDA receptor initiates subsequent molecular pathways that have a defined role in establishing long-lasting synaptic changes. The molecular signaling initiated by a rise in Ca2+ within the spine leads to phosphorylation of Cyclic AMP Response Element binding protein (CREB) at serine 133 which is involved in the transcription of genes that results in long lasting changes in the synapse. The phosphorylation of CREB by increased Ca2+ can be brought about by distinct molecular pathways that may involve MAP kinase, activation of adenylate cyclase, activation of CaMKII and/or the activation of CaMKIV.
R-HSA-399956	CRMPs in Sema3A signaling	CRMPs are a small family of plexinA-interacting cytosolic phosphoproteins identified as mediators of Sema3A signaling and neuronal differentiation. After Sema3A activation Plexin-A bound CRMP's undergo phosphorylation by Cdk5, GSK3beta and Fes kinases. Phosphorylation of CRMPs by these kinases blocks the ability of CRMP to bind to tubulin dimers, subsequently induces depolymerization of F-actin, and ultimately leads to growth cone collapse.
R-HSA-192869	cRNA Synthesis	Synthesis of full length complementary viral RNA (cRNA) requires that vRNA transcription initiates without the help of a host cell methyl RNA cap as a primer (Crow, 2004; Vreede, 2004; Deng, 2006), and that it proceeds to the 5' end of the vRNA template without stuttering on the sub-terminal poly-U sequence. Free viral NP protein appears to play a central role in enabling both of these features of cRNA synthesis, although the molecular details of its role remain unclear (Shapiro, 1988; Medcalf, 1999; Mullin, 2004).
R-HSA-1236973	Cross-presentation of particulate exogenous antigens (phagosomes)	Dendritic cells (DCs) take up and process exogenous particulate or cell-associated antigens such as microbes or tumor cells for MHC-I cross-presentation. Particulate antigens have been reported to be more efficiently cross-presented than soluble antigens by DCs (Khor et al. 2008). Particulate antigens are internalized by phagosomes. There are two established models that explain the mechanism by which exogenous particulate antigens are presented through MHC I; the cytosolic pathway where internalized antigens are somehow translocated from phagosomes into cytosol for proteasomal degradation and the vacuolar pathway (Lin et al. 2008, Amigorena et al. 2010).
R-HSA-1236978	Cross-presentation of soluble exogenous antigens (endosomes)	Exogenous soluble antigens are cross-presented by dendritic cells, albeit with lower efficiency than for particulate substrates. Soluble antigens destined for cross-presentation are taken up by distinct endocytosis mechanisms which route them into stable early endosomes and then to the cytoplasm for proteasomal degradation and peptide loading.
R-HSA-2243919	Crosslinking of collagen fibrils	After removal of the N- and C-procollagen propeptides, fibrillar collagen molecules aggregate into microfibrillar arrays, stabilized by covalent intermolecular cross-links. These depend on the oxidative deamination of specific lysine or hydroxylysine residues in the telopeptide region by lysyl oxidase (LOX) with the subsequent spontaneous formation of covalent intermolecular cross-links (Pinnell & Martin 1968, Siegel et al. 1970, 1974, Maki 2009, Nishioka et al. 2012). Hydroxylysine is formed intracellularly by lysine hydroxylases (LH). There are different forms of LH responsible for hydroxylation of helical and telopeptide lysines (Royce & Barnes 1985, Knott et al.1997, Takaluoma et al. 2007, Myllyla 2007). The chemistry of the cross-links formed depends on whether lysines or hydroxylysines are present in the telopeptides (Barnes et al. 1974), which depends on the proportion of collagen lysines post-translationally converted to hydroxylysine by LH. The lysine pathway predominates in adult skin, cornea and sclera while the hydroxylysine pathway occurs primarily in bone, cartilage, ligament, tendons, embryonic skin and most connective tissues (Eyre 1987, Eyre & Wu 2005, Eyre et al. 2008). Oxidative deamination of lysine or hydroxylysine residues by LOX generates the allysine and hydroxyallysine aldehydes respectively. These can spontaneously react with either another aldehyde to form an aldol condensation product (intramolecular cross-link), or with an unmodified lysine or hydroxylysine residue to form intermolecular cross-links.<br><br>The pathway of cross-linking is regulated primarily by the hydroxylation pattern of telopeptide and triple-helix domain lysine residues. When lysine residues are the source of aldehydes formed by lysyl oxidase the allysine cross-linking pathway leads to the formation of aldimine cross-links (Eyre & Wu 2005). These are stable at physiological conditions but readily cleaved at acid pH or elevated temperature. When hydroxylysine residues are the source of aldehydes formed by lysyl oxidase the hydroxyallysine cross-linking pathway leads to the formation of more stable ketoimine cross-links. <br><br>Telopeptide lysine residues can be converted by LOX to allysine, which can react with a helical hydroxylysine residue forming the lysine aldehyde aldimine cross-link dehydro hydroxylysino norleucine (deHHLNL) (Bailey & Peach 1968, Eyre et al. 2008). If the telopeptide residue is hydroxylysine, the hydroxyallysine formed by LOX can react with a helical hydroxylysine forming the Schiff base, which spontaneously undergoes an Amadori rearrangement resulting in the ketoimine cross link hydroxylysino 5 ketonorleucine (HLKNL). This stable cross-link is formed in tissues where telopeptide residues are predominanly hydroxylated, such as foetal bone and cartilage, accounting for the relative insolubility of collagen from these tissues (Bailey et al. 1998). In bone, telopeptide hydroxyallysines can react with the epsilon-amino group of a helical lysine (Robins & Bailey 1975). The resulting Schiff base undergoes Amadori rearrangement to form lysino-hydroxynorleucine (LHNL). An alternative mechanism of maturation of ketoimine cross-links has been reported in cartilage leading to the formation of arginoline (Eyre et al. 2010). <br><br>These divalent crosslinks greatly diminish as connective tissues mature, due to further spontaneous reactions (Bailey & Shimokomaki 1971, Robins & Bailey 1973) with neighbouring peptides that result in tri- and tetrafunctional cross-links. In mature tissues collagen cross-links are predominantly trivalent. The most common are pyridinoline or 3-hydroxypyridinium cross-links, namely hydroxylysyl-pyridinoline (HL-Pyr) and lysyl-pyridinoline (L-Pyr) cross-links (Eyre 1987, Ogawa et al. 1982, Fujimoto et al. 1978). HL-Pyr is formed from three hydroxylysine residues, HLKNL plus a further hydroxyallysine. It predominates in highly hydroxylated collagens such as type II collagen in cartilage. L-Pyr is formed from two hydroxylysines and a lysine, LKNL plus a further hydroxyallysine, found mostly in calcified tissues (Bailey et al. 1998). Trivalent collagen cross-links can also form as pyrroles, either Lysyl-Pyrrole (L-Pyrrole) or hydroxylysyl-pyrrole (HL-Pyrrole), respectively formed when LKNL or HLKNL react with allysine (Scott et al. 1981, Kuypers et al. 1992). A further three-way crosslink can form when DeH-HLNL reacts with histidine to form histidino-hydroxylysinonorleucine (HHL), found in skin and cornea (Yamauchi et al. 1987, 1996). This can react with an additional lysine to form the tetrafunctional cross-link histidinohydroxymerodesmosine (Reiser et al. 1992, Yamauchi et al. 1996). <br> <br>Another mechanism which could be involved in the cross-linking of collagen IV networks is the sulfilimine bond (Vanacore et al. 2009), catalyzed by peroxidasin, an enzyme found in basement membrane (Bhave 2012).<br><br>To improve clarity inter-chain cross-linking is represented here for Collagen type I only. Although the formation of each type of cross-link is represented here as an independent event, the partial and random nature of lysine hydroxylation and subsequent lysyl oxidation means that any combination of these cross-linking events could occur within the same collagen fibril .
R-HSA-2024101	CS/DS degradation	Lysosomal degradation of glycoproteins is part of the cellular homeostasis of glycosylation (Winchester 2005). The steps outlined below describe the degradation of chondroitin sulfate and dermatan sulfate. Complete degradation of glycoproteins is required to avoid build up of glycosaminoglycan fragments which can cause lysosomal storage diseases. Complete degradation steps are not shown as they are repetitions of the main ones described here. The proteolysis of the core protein of the glycoprotein is not shown here.
R-HSA-389513	CTLA4 inhibitory signaling	CTLA4 is one of the best studied inhibitory receptors of the CD28 superfamily. CTLA4 inhibits Tcell activation by reducing IL2 production and IL2 expression, and by arresting T cells at the G1 phase of the cell cycle. CTLA-4 expressed by a T cell subpopulation exerts a dominant control on the proliferation of other T cells, which limits autoreactivity. CTLA4 also blocks CD28 signals by competing for the ligands B71 and B72 in the limited space between T cells and antigenpresenting cells. Though the mechanism is obscure, CTLA4 may also propagate inhibitory signals that actively counter those produced by CD28. CTLA4 can also function in a ligand-independent manner.?<br>CTLA-4 regulates the activation of pathogenic T cells by directly modulating T cell receptor signaling (i.e. TCR-zeta chain phosphorylation) as well as downstream biochemical signals (i.e. ERK activation). The cytoplasmic region of CTLA4 contains a tyrosine motif YVKM and a proline rich region. After TCR stimulation, it undergoes tyrosine phosphorylation by src kinases, inducing surface retention. 
R-HSA-69273	Cyclin A/B1 associated events during G2/M transition	Cell cycle progression is regulated by cyclin-dependent protein kinases at both the G1/S and the G2/M transitions. The G2/M transition is regulated through the phosphorylation of nuclear lamins and histones (reviewed in Sefton, 2001).
R-HSA-69656	Cyclin A:Cdk2-associated events at S phase entry	Cyclin A:Cdk2 plays a key role in S phase entry by phosphorylation of proteins including Cdh1, Rb, p21 and p27. During G1 phase of the cell cycle, cyclin A is synthesized and associates with Cdk2. After forming in the cytoplasm, the Cyclin A:Cdk2 complexes are translocated to the nucleus (Jackman et al.,2002). Prior to S phase entry, the activity of Cyclin A:Cdk2 complexes is negatively regulated through Tyr 15 phosphorylation of Cdk2 (Gu et al., 1995) and also by the association of the cyclin kinase inhibitors (CKIs), p27 and p21. Phosphorylation of cyclin-dependent kinases (CDKs) by the CDK-activating kinase (CAK) is required for the activation of the CDK2 kinase activity (Aprelikova et al., 1995). The entry into S phase is promoted by the removal of inhibitory Tyr 15 phosphates from the Cdk2 subunit of Cyclin A:Cdk2 complex by the Cdc25 phosphatases (Blomberg and Hoffmann, 1999) and by SCF(Skp2)-mediated degradation of p27/p21 (see Ganoth et al., 2001). While Cdk2 is thought to play a primary role in regulating entry into S phase, recent evidence indicates that Cdk1 is equally capable of promoting entry into S phase and the initiation of DNA replication (see Bashir and Pagano, 2005). Thus, Cdk1 complexes may also play a significant role at this point in the cell cycle.
R-HSA-157881	Cyclin B2 mediated events	The two B-type cyclins localize to different regions within <br>the cell and and are thought to have specific roles as CDK1-activating subunits (see Bellanger et al., 2007). Cyclin B1 is primarily cytoplasmic during interphase and translocates into the nucleus at the onset of mitosis (Jackman et al., 1995; Hagting et al., 1999). Cyclin B2 colocalizes with the Golgi apparatus and contributes to its fragmentation during mitosis (Jackman et al., 1995; Draviam et al., 2001).
R-HSA-69231	Cyclin D associated events in G1	Three D-type cyclins are essential for progression from G1 to S-phase. These D cyclins bind to and activate both CDK4 and CDK6. The formation of all possible complexes between the D-type cyclins and CDK4/6 is promoted by the proteins, p21(CIP1/WAF1) and p27(KIP1). The cyclin-dependent kinases are then activated due to phosphorylation by CAK. The cyclin dependent kinases phosphorylate the RB1 protein and RB1-related proteins p107 (RBL1) and p130 (RBL2). Phosphorylation of RB1 leads to release of activating E2F transcription factors (E2F1, E2F2 and E2F3). After repressor E2Fs (E2F4 and E2F5) dissociate from phosphorylated RBL1 and RBL2, activating E2Fs bind to E2F promoter sites, stimulating transcription of cell cycle genes, which then results in proper G1/S transition. The binding and sequestration of p27Kip may also contribute to the activation of CDK2 cyclin E/CDK2 cyclin A complexes at the G1/S transition (Yew et al., 2001). 
R-HSA-69202	Cyclin E associated events during G1/S transition 	The transition from the G1 to S phase is controlled by the Cyclin E:Cdk2 complexes. As the Cyclin E:Cdk2 complexes are formed, the Cdk2 is phosphorylated by the Wee1 and Myt1 kinases. This phosphorylation keeps the Cdk2 inactive. In yeast this control is called the cell size checkpoint control. The dephosphorylation of the Cdk2 by Cdc25A activates the Cdk2, and is coordinated with the cells reaching the proper size, and with the DNA synthesis machinery being ready. The Cdk2 then phosphorylates G1/S specific proteins, including proteins required for DNA replication initiation. The beginning of S-phase is marked by the first nucleotide being laid down on the primer during DNA replication at the early-firing origins.Failure to appropriately regulate cyclin E accumulation can lead to accelerated S phase entry, genetic instability, and tumorigenesis. The amount of cyclin E protein in the cell is controlled by ubiquitin-mediated proteolysis (see Woo, 2003).This pathway has not yet been annotated in Reactome. 
R-HSA-211999	CYP2E1 reactions	CYP2E1 can metabolize and activate a large number of solvents and industrial monomers as well as drugs. This quality of CYP2E1 may make it an important determinant of human susceptibility to the toxic effects of industrial and environmental chemicals. Typical CYP2E1 substrates include acetaminophen, benzene, CCl4, halothane, ethanol and vinyl chloride. CYP2E1 contributes to oxidative stress by producing oxidising species called reactive oxygen species (ROS) which can lead to damage to mitochondria, DNA and initiate lipid peroxidation or even cell death.
R-HSA-1614603	Cysteine formation from homocysteine	Transsulfuration is the interconversion of homocysteine and cysteine, and it fully takes place in bacteria and some plants and fungi. Animals however have only one direction of this bidirectional path, the synthesis of cysteine from homocysteine via cystathionine. Because excess cysteine is degraded to hydrogen sulfide, which is now known as a neuromodulator and smooth muscle relaxant, this pathway is also the main source of its production, which takes place in the cytosol, as well as in extracellular space (Dominy & Stipanuk 2004, Bearden et al. 2010).
R-HSA-111461	Cytochrome c-mediated apoptotic response	Upon its release from the mitochondrial intermembrane space, Cytochrome c binds to and causes a conformational change in the cytoplasmic protein Apaf1. This conformational change allows the Cytochrome c:Apaf1 complex to associate with ATP triggering oligomerization of the Apaf1:Cytochrome c:ATP complex. The apoptosome then associates with Procaspase-9 resulting in the formation of the active caspase-9 holoenzyme which functions in cleaving effector caspases.
R-HSA-211897	Cytochrome P450 - arranged by substrate type	<p>The P450 isozyme system is the major phase 1 biotransforming system in man, accounting for more than 90% of drug biotransformations. This system has huge catalytic versatility and a broad substrate specificity, acting upon xenobiotica and endogenous compounds. It is also called the mixed-function oxidase system, the P450 monooxygenases and the heme-thiolate protein system. All P450 enzymes are a group of <i><b>heme-containing isozymes</b></i> which are located on the membrane of the smooth endoplasmic reticulum. They can be found in all tissues of the human body but are most concentrated in the liver. The name "cytochrome P450" (CYP) is derived from the spectral absorbance maximum at 450nm when carbon monoxide binds to CYP in its reduced (ferrous, Fe<sup>2+</sup>) state. The basic reaction catalyzed by CYP is <i><b>mono-oxygenation</b></i>, that is the transfer of one oxygen atom from molecular oxygen to a substrate. The other oxygen atom is reduced to water during the reaction with the equivalents coming from the cofactor NADPH. The basic reaction is;</p><b><p align=center> RH (substrate) + O<sub>2</sub> + NADPH + H<sup>+</sup> = ROH (product) + H<sub>2</sub>O + NADP<sup>+</sup></p></b><p>The end results of this reaction can be (N-)hydroxylation, epoxidation, heteroatom (N-, S-) oxygenation, heteroatom (N-, S-, O-) dealkylation, ester cleavage, isomerization, dehydrogenation, replacement by oxygen or even reduction under anaerobic conditions.</p><p>The metabolites produced from these reactions can either be mere intermediates which have relatively little reactivity towards cellular sysytems and are readily conjugated, or, they can be disruptive to cellular systems. Indeed, inert compounds need to be prepared for conjugation and thus the formation of potentially reactive metabolites is in most cases unavoidable.</p><p>There are 57 human CYPs (in 18 families and 42 subfamilies), mostly concentrated in the endoplasmic reticulum of liver cells although many tissues have them to some extent (Nelson DR et al, 2004). CYPs are grouped into 14 families according to their sequence similarity. Generally, enzymes in the same family share 40% sequence similarity and 55% within a subfamily. Nomenclature of P450s is as follows. CYP (to represent cytochrome P450 superfamily), followed by an arabic number for the family, a capital letter for the subfamily and finally a second arabic number to denote the isoenzyme. An example is CYP1A1 which is the first enzyme in subfamily A of cytochrome P450 family 1.</p><p>The majority of the enzymes are present in the CYP1-4 families. CYP1-3 are primarily concerned with xenobiotic biotransformation whereas the other CYPs deal primarily with endogenous compounds. The CYP section is structured by the typical substrate they act upon. Of the 57 human CYPs, 7 encode mitochondrial enzymes, all involved in sterol biosynthesis. Of the remaining 50 microsomal enzymes, 20 act upon endogenous compounds, 15 on xenobiotics and 15 are the so-called "orphan enzymes" with no substrate identified.</p><p>The P450 catalytic cycle <i>(picture)</i> shows the steps involved when a substrate binds to the enzyme.</p><p><font color=red>(1)</font> The normal state of a P450 with the iron in its ferric [Fe<sup>3+</sup>] state.</p><p><font color=red>(2)</font> The substrate binds to the enzyme.</p><p><font color=red>(3)</font> The enzyme is reduced to the ferrous [Fe<sup>2+</sup>] state by the addition of an electron from NADPH cytochrome P450 reductase. The bound substrate facilitates this process.</p><p><font color=red>(4,5)</font> Molecular oxygen binds and forms an Fe<sup>2+</sup>OOH complex with the addition of a proton and a second donation of an electron from either NADPH cytochrome P450 reductase or cytochrome b5. A second proton cleaves the Fe<sup>2+</sup>OOH complex to form water.</p><p><font color=red>(6)</font> An unstable [FeO]<sup>3+</sup> complex donates its oxygen to the substrate <font color=red>(7)</font>. The oxidised substrate is released and the enzyme returns to its initial state <font color=red>(1)</font>.</p>
R-HSA-1280215	Cytokine Signaling in Immune system	Cytokines are small proteins that regulate and mediate immunity, inflammation, and hematopoiesis. They are secreted in response to immune stimuli, and usually act briefly, locally, at very low concentrations. Cytokines bind to specific membrane receptors, which then signal the cell via second messengers, to regulate cellular activity.
R-HSA-2564830	Cytosolic iron-sulfur cluster assembly	Iron-sulfur clusters containing 4 atoms of iron and 4 atoms of sulfur (4Fe-4S clusters) are assembled in the cytosol on a heterotetrameric scaffold composed of NUBP2 and NUBP1 subunits (reviewed in Lill et al. 2012, Rouault et al. 2012, Sharma et al. 2010, Lill and Muhlenhoff 2006). The sources of iron and sulfur are uncertain but the process requires a sulfur-containing compound exported from mitochondria via ABCB7 (ABC7). Newly synthesized 4Fe-4S are transferred to apoproteins such as XPD and POLD1 via the CIA targeting complex, composed of NARFL, CIAO1, FAM96B, and MMS19.
R-HSA-1834949	Cytosolic sensors of pathogen-associated DNA 	Presence of pathogen-associated DNA in cytosol induces type I IFN production. Several intracellular receptors have been implicated to some degree. These include DNA-dependent activator of interferon (IFN)-regulatory factors (DAI) (also called Z-DNA-binding protein 1, ZBP1), absent in melanoma 2 (AIM2), RNA polymerase III (Pol III), IFN-inducible protein IFI16, leucine-rich repeat flightless interacting protein-1 (LRRFIP1), DEAH-box helicases (DHX9 and DHX36), DEAD-box helicase DDX41, meiotic recombination 11 homolog A (MRE11), DNA-dependent protein kinase (DNA-PK), cyclic GMP-AMP synthase (cGAS) and stimulator of interferon genes (STING).<p>Detection of cytosolic DNA requires multiple and possibly redundant sensors leading to activation of the transcription factor NF-kappaB and TBK1-mediated phosphorylation of the transcription factor IRF3. Cytosolic DNA also activates caspase-1-dependent maturation of the pro-inflammatory cytokines interleukin IL-1beta and IL-18. This pathway is mediated by AIM2.
R-HSA-156584	Cytosolic sulfonation of small molecules	Two groups of sulfotransferease (SULT) enzymes catalyze the transfer of a sulfate group from 3-phosphoadenosine 5-phosphosulfate (PAPS) to a hydroxyl group on an acceptor molecule, yielding a sulfonated acceptor and 3-phosphoadenosine 5-phosphate (PAP). One is localized to the Golgi apparatus and mediates the sulfonation of proteoglycans. The second, annotated here, is cytosolic and mediates the sulfonation of a diverse array of small molecules, increasing their solubilities in water and modifying their physiological functions. There are probably thirteen or more human cytosolic SULT enzymes; eleven of these have been purified and characterized enzymatically, and are annotated here (Blanchard et al. 2004; Gamage et al. 2005). These enzymes appear to be active as dimers. Their substrate specificities are typically broad, and not related in an obvious way to their structures; indeed, apparently orthologous human and rodent SULT enzymes can have different substrate specificities (Glatt 2000), and none has been exhaustively characterized. The substrates listed in the table and annotated here are a sample of the known ones, chosen to indicate the range of activity of these enzymes and to capture some of their known physiologically important targets. Absence of a small molecule - enzyme pair from the table, however, may only mean that it has not yet been studied.
R-HSA-379716	Cytosolic tRNA aminoacylation	Cytosolic tRNA synthetases catalyze the reactions of tRNAs encoded in the nuclear genome, their cognate amino acids, and ATP to form aminoacyl-tRNAs, AMP, and pyrophosphate. Eight of the tRNA synthetases, those specific for arginine, aspartate, glutamate and proline, glutamine, isoleucine, leucine, lysine, and methionine, associate to form a complex with three accessory proteins. Each of the component synthetases is active in vitro as a purified protein; complex formation is thought to channel aminoacylated tRNAs more efficiently to the site of protein synthesis in mRNA:ribosome complexes (Quevillon et al. 1999; Wolfe et al. 2003, 2005).
R-HSA-1489509	DAG and IP3 signaling	This pathway describes the generation of DAG and IP3 by the PLCgamma-mediated hydrolysis of PIP2 and the subsequent downstream signaling events.
R-HSA-2172127	DAP12 interactions	DNAX activation protein of 12kDa (DAP12) is an immunoreceptor tyrosine-based activation motif (ITAM)-bearing adapter molecule that transduces activating signals in natural killer (NK) and myeloid cells. It mediates signalling for multiple cell-surface receptors expressed by these cells, associating with receptor chains through complementary charged transmembrane amino acids that form a salt-bridge in the context of the hydrophobic lipid bilayer (Lanier et al. 1998). DAP12 homodimers associate with a variety of receptors expressed by macrophages, monocytes and myeloid cells including TREM2, Siglec H and SIRP-beta, as well as activating KIR, LY49 and the NKG2C proteins expressed by NK cells. DAP12 is expressed at the cell surface, with most of the protein lying on the cytoplasmic side of the membrane (Turnbull & Colonna 2007, Tessarz & Cerwenka 2008).
R-HSA-2424491	DAP12 signaling	In response to receptor ligation, the tyrosine residues in DAP12's immunoreceptor tyrosine-based activation motif (ITAM) are phosphorylated by Src family kinases. These phosphotyrosines form the docking site for the protein tyrosine kinase SYK in myeloid cells and SYK and ZAP70 in NK cells. DAP12-bound SYK autophosphorylates and phosphorylates the scaffolding molecule LAT, recruiting the proximal signaling molecules phosphatidylinositol-3-OH kinase (PI3K), phospholipase-C gamma (PLC-gamma), GADS (GRB2-related adapter downstream of SHC), SLP76 (SH2 domain-containing leukocyte protein of 76 kDa), GRB2:SOS (Growth factor receptor-bound protein 2:Son of sevenless homolog 1) and VAV. All of these intermediate signalling molecules result in the recruitment and activation of kinases AKT, CBL (Casitas B-lineage lymphoma) and ERK (extracellular signal-regulated kinase), and rearrangement of the actin cytoskeleton (actin polymerization) finally leading to cellular activation. PLC-gamma generates the secondary messengers diacylglycerol (DAG) and inositol-1,4,5-trisphosphate (InsP3), leading to activation of protein kinase C (PKC) and calcium mobilization, respectively (Turnbull & Colonna 2007, Klesney-Tait et al. 2006).
R-HSA-180024	DARPP-32 events	Dopamine- and cAMP-regulated phosphoprotein, Mr 32 kDa (DARPP-32), was identified as a major target for dopamine and protein kinase A (PKA) in striatum. Recent advances now indicate that regulation DARPP-32 phosphorylation provides a mechanism for integrating information arriving at dopaminoceptive neurons, in multiple brain regions, via a variety of neurotransmitters, neuromodulators, neuropeptides, and steroid hormones. Activation of PKA or PKG stimulates DARPP-32 phosphorylation at Thr34, converting DARPP-32 into a potent inhibitor of protein phosphatase-1 (PP-1). DARPP-32 is also phosphorylated at Thr75 by Cdk5, converting DARPP-32 into an inhibitor of PKA. Thus, DARPP-32 has the unique property of being a dual-function protein, acting either as an inhibitor of PP-1 or of PKA.
R-HSA-418885	DCC mediated attractive signaling	The DCC family includes DCC and neogenin in vertebrates. DCC is required for netrin-induced axon attraction. DCC is a transmembrane protein lacking any identifiable catalytic activity. Protein tyrosine kinase 2/FAK and src family kinases bind constitutively to the cytoplasmic domain of DCC and their activation couples to downstream intracellular signaling complex that directs the organization of actin.
R-HSA-3769402	Deactivation of the beta-catenin transactivating complex	The mechanisms involved in downregulation of TCF-dependent transcription are not yet very well understood. beta-catenin is known to recruit a number of transcriptional repressors, including Reptin, SMRT and NCoR, to the TCF/LEF complex, allowing the transition from activation to repression (Bauer et al, 2000; Weiske et al, 2007; Song and Gelmann, 2008). CTNNBIP1 (also known as ICAT) and Chibby are inhibitors of TCF-dependent signaling that function by binding directly to beta-catenin and preventing interactions with critical components of the transactivation machinery (Takemaru et al, 2003; Li et al, 2008; Tago et al, 2000; Graham et al, 2002; Daniels and Weiss, 2002). Chibby additionally promotes the nuclear export of beta-catenin in conjunction with 14-3-3/YWHAZ proteins (Takemura et al, 2003; Li et al, 2008). A couple of recent studies have also suggested a role for nuclear APC in the disassembly of the beta-catenin activation complex (Hamada and Bienz, 2004; Sierra et al, 2006). It is worth noting that while some of the players involved in the disassembly of the beta-catenin transactivating complex are beginning to be worked out in vitro, the significance of their role in vivo is not yet fully understood, and some can be knocked out with little effect on endogenous WNT signaling (see for instance Voronina et al, 2009).
R-HSA-429947	Deadenylation of mRNA	Deadenylation of mRNA proceeds in two steps. According to current models, in the first step the poly(A) tail is shortened from about 200 adenosine residues to about 80 residues by the PAN2-PAN3 complex. In the second step the poly(A) tail is further shortened to 10-15 residues by either the CCR4-NOT complex or by the PARN exoribonuclease. How a particular mRNA is targeted to CCR4-NOT or PARN is unknown.<br>A number of other deadenylase enzymes can be identified in genomic searches. One particularly interesting one is nocturin, a protein that is related to the CCR-1 deadenylase and plays a role in circadian rhythms.<br>There is also evidence for networking between deadenylation and other aspects of gene expression. CCR4-NOT, for example, is known to be a transcription factor. PARN is part of a complex that regulates poly(A) tail length and hence translation in developing oocytes.
R-HSA-429914	Deadenylation-dependent mRNA decay	After undergoing rounds of translation, mRNA is normally destroyed by the deadenylation-dependent pathway. Though the trigger is unclear, deadenylation likely proceeds in two steps: one catalyzed by the PAN2-PAN3 complex that shortens the poly(A) tail from about 200 adenosine residues to about 80 residues and one catalyzed by the CCR4-NOT complex or by the PARN enzyme that shortens the tail to about 10-15 residues.<br>After deadenylation the mRNA is then hydrolyzed by either the 5' to 3' pathway or the 3' to 5' pathway. It is unknown what determinants target a mRNA to one pathway or the other.<br>The 5' to 3' pathway is initiated by binding of the Lsm1-7 complex to the 3' oligoadenylate tail followed by decapping by the DCP1-DCP2 complex. The 5' to 3' exoribonuclease XRN1 then hydrolyzes the remaining RNA.<br>The 3' to 5' pathway is initiated by the exosome complex at the 3' end of the mRNA. The exosome processively hydrolyzes the mRNA from 3' to 5', leaving only a capped oligoribonucleotide. The cap is then removed by the scavenging decapping enzyme DCPS.
R-HSA-73887	Death Receptor Signalling	The death receptors, all cell-surface receptors, begin the process of caspase activation. The common feature of these type 1 transmembrane proteins is the "death-domain" a conserved cytoplasmic motif found on all of the three receptors (FAS/CD95, TNF-receptor, and TRAIL-receptor) that binds the Fas-associated protein with death domain (FADD). Ligand binding to death receptors (DR) results in receptor oligomerization and recruitment of adaptor proteins via homophilic interaction of death domains. This project describes an assembly of the death-inducing signaling complex (DISC) and shows protein composition and stoichiometry within the DISC. It also provides the appropriate literature references if available. However, the DISC signaling complex may vary in its components stoichiometry. DR signaling may trigger formation of higher order receptor structures or signaling through rearrangement of receptor chains, which is not reflected here.
R-HSA-5607761	Dectin-1 mediated noncanonical NF-kB signaling	In addition to the activation of canonical NF-kB subunits, activation of SYK pathway by Dectin-1 leads to the induction of the non-canonical NF-kB pathway, which mediates the nuclear translocation of RELB-p52 dimers through the successive activation of NF-kB-inducing kinase (NIK) and IkB kinase-alpha (IKKa) (Geijtenbeek& Gringhuis2009, Gringhuis et al. 2009). Noncanonical activity tends to build more slowly and remain sustained several hours longer than does the activation of canonical NF-kB. The noncanonical NF-kB pathway is characterized by the post-translational processing of NFKB2 (Nuclear factor NF-kappa-B) p100 subunit to the mature p52 subunit. This subsequently leads to nuclear translocation of p52:RELB (Transcription factor RelB) complexes to induce cytokine expression of some genes (C-C motif chemokine 17 (CCL17) and CCL22) and transcriptional repression of others (IL12B) (Gringhuis et al. 2009, Geijtenbeek & Gringhuis 2009, Plato et al. 2013). 
R-HSA-5621480	Dectin-2 family	Dendritic cell-associated C-type lectin-2 (Dectin-2) family of C-type lectin receptors (CLRs) includes Dectin-2 (CLEC6A), blood dendritic antigen 2 (BDCA2/CLEC4C), macrophage C-type lectin (MCL/CLEC4D), Dendritic cell immunoreceptor (DCIR/CLEC4A) and macrophage inducible C-type lectin (Mincle/CLEC4E). These receptors possesses a single extracellular conserved C-type lectin domain (CTLD) with a short cytoplasmic tail that induces intracellular signalling indirectly by binding with the FCERG (High affinity immunoglobulin epsilon receptor subunit gamma) except for DCIR that has a longer cytoplasmic tail with an integral inhibitory signalling motif (Graham & Brown. 2009, Kerschera et al. 2013). CLEC6A (Dectin-2) binds to high mannose containing pathogen-associated molecular patterns (PAMPs) expressed by fungal hyphae, and CLEC4E (mincle) binds to alpha-mannaosyl PAMPs on fungal, mycobacterial and necrotic cell ligands. Both signaling pathways lead to Toll-like receptor (TLR)-independent production of cytokines such as tumor necrosis factor (TNF) and interleukin 6 (IL6). Similarities with Dectin-1 (CLC7A) signaling pathway suggests that both these CLRs couple SYK activation to NF-kB activation using a complex involving CARD9, BCL10 and MALT1 (Geijtenbeek & Gringhuis 2009). 
R-HSA-5688399	Defective ABCA3 causes pulmonary surfactant metabolism dysfunction 3 (SMDP3)	ATP-binding cassette sub-family A member 3 (ABCA3) plays an important role in the formation of pulmonary surfactant, probably by transporting phospholipids such as phosphatidylcholine (PC) and phosphatidylglycerol (PG) from the ER membrane to lamellar bodies (LBs). PC and PG are the major phospholipid constituents of pulmonary surfactant. LBs are the surfactant storage organelles of type II epithelial cells from where phospholipids can be secreted together with surfactant proteins (SFTPs) into the alveolar airspace. Defects in ABCA3 can cause pulmonary surfactant metabolism dysfunction type 3 (SMDP3; MIM:610921), resulting in respiratory distress in newborns and interstitial lung disease (ILD) in children (Whitsett et al. 2015).
R-HSA-5678520	Defective ABCB11 causes progressive familial intrahepatic cholestasis 2 and benign recurrent intrahepatic cholestasis 2	The bile salt export pump ABCB11 mediates the release of bile salts from liver cells into bile. Defects in ABCB11 can cause two clinically distinct forms of cholestasis; progressive familial intrahepatic cholestasis 2 (PFIC2; MIM:601847) and benign recurrent intrahepatic cholestasis 2 (BRIC2; MIM:605479). Cholestasis is characterized by the retention of bile acids or salts. Bile acids can damage hepatocytes and bile duct cells leading to inflammation, fibrosis, cirrhosis and eventually carcinogenesis. PFIC2 patients suffer from chronic cholestasis and develop liver fibrosis, cirrhosis and end-stage liver disease before adulthood. BRIC2 patients experience intermittent episodes of cholestasis that resolve spontaneously after weeks or months (Strubbe et al. 2012, Cuperus et al. 2014).
R-HSA-5678771	Defective ABCB4 causes progressive familial intrahepatic cholestasis 3, intrahepatic cholestasis of pregnancy 3 and gallbladder disease 1	Multidrug resistance protein 3 (ATP-binding cassette sub-family B member 4, ABCB4 aka MDR3) mediates the ATP-dependent export of organic anions, phospholipids and drugs from hepatocytes into the canalicular lumen in the presence of bile salts, especially the export of phospholipids such as phosphatidylcholine (PC). Biliary phospholipids associate with bile salts and cholesterol in mixed micelles, thereby reducing the detergent activity and cytotoxicity of bile salts and preventing cholesterol crystallisation. Thus, ABCB4 plays a crucial role in bile formation and lipid homeostasis. Defects in ABCB4 result in a wide spectrum of cholestasis phenotypes, from progressive familial intrahepatic cholestasis 3 (PFIC3; MIM:602347) and intrahepatic cholestasis of pregnancy 3 (ICP3; MIM:614972) to gallbladder disease 1 (GBD1; MIM:600803) (Jacquemin et al. 2001, Davit-Spraul et al. 2010, Jacquemin 2012). In PFIC3, the biliary phospholipid level is substantially decreased despite the presence of bile acids. Cholestasis may be caused by the toxicity of detergent bile salts that are not associated with phospholipids, leading to bile canaliculus and biliary epithelium damage. ICP3 is a reversible form of cholestasis in the third trimester of pregnancy and quickly disappears after childbearing. GBD1 is one of the major digestive diseases. Gallstones composed of cholesterol (cholelithiasis) are the common manifestations of GBD1 in western countries. Most people with gallstones remain asymptomatic throughout their lifetimes but approximately 10-50% of individuals eventually develop symptoms. 
R-HSA-5683371	Defective ABCB6 causes isolated colobomatous microphthalmia 7 (MCOPCB7)	ATP-binding cassette sub-family B member 6 (ABCB6), uniquely located on the outer mitochondrial membrane in homodimeric form, plays a crucial role in haem synthesis by mediating porphyrin uptake into the mitochondria. Defects in ABCB6 can cause isolated colobomatous microphthalmia 7 (MCOPCB7; MIM:614497), a developmental defect of the eye resulting from abnormal or incomplete fusion of the optic fissure with associated microphthalmia (eyeballs are abnormally small). Coloboma is thought to play an important role in the early development of the CNS, including that of the eye (Wang et al. 2012).
R-HSA-5678420	Defective ABCC9 causes dilated cardiomyopathy 10, familial atrial fibrillation 12 and hypertrichotic osteochondrodysplasia	ATP-binding cassette sub-family C member 9 (ABCC9) forms cardiac and smooth muscle-type KATP channels with ATP-sensitive inward rectifier potassium channel 11 (KCNJ11). KCNJ11 forms the channel pore while ABCC9 is required for activation and regulation (Babenko et al. 1998, Tammaro & Ashcroft 2007). Inward rectifier potassium channels favor the flow of potassium into the cell rather than out of it. KATP channels open and close in response to intracellular changes in the ADP/ATP ratio, thereby linking the metabolic state of the cell to its membrane potential. Inhibition of KATP channel activity causes membrane depolarization and thereby activation of voltage-dependent Ca2+ channels, leading to Ca2+ influx and a rise in intracellular Ca2+ concentration. Correct maintenance of calcium balance is essential for the normal functioning of the heart.<br><br>Defects in ABCC9 can cause dilated cardiomyopathy 10 (CMD10: MIM:608569), a disorder characterised by ventricular dilation and impaired systolic function, resulting in congestive heart failure and arrhythmia (Bienengraeber et al. 2004). Defects in ABCC9 can also cause familial atrial fibrillation 12 (ATFB12; MIM:614050), characterised by disorganized atrial electrical activity and ineffective atrial contraction resulting in blood stasis in the atria and reduces ventricular filling. It can result in palpitations, syncope, thromboembolic stroke, and congestive heart failure (Olson et al. 2007). Defects in ABCC9 can also cause hypertrichotic osteochondrodysplasia (Cantu syndrome; MIM:239850), a rare disorder characterised by congenital hypertrichosis, neonatal macrosomia, a distinct osteochondrodysplasia and cardiomegaly (van Bon et al. 2012, Harakalova et al. 2012).
R-HSA-5579031	Defective ACTH causes Obesity and Pro-opiomelanocortinin deficiency (POMCD)	The precursor peptide pro-opiomelanocortin (POMC) gives rise to many peptide hormones through cleavage. The cleavage products corticotropin (ACTH) and beta-lipotropin give rise to smaller peptides that have distinct biologic activities: alpha-melanotropin and corticotropin-like intermediate lobe peptide (CLIP) are formed from ACTH; gamma-LPH and beta-endorphin are formed from beta-LPH. ACTH (POMC(138-176) stimulates the adrenal glands to release cortisol, a glucocorticoid released in response to stress whose primary functions are to stimulate gluconeogenesis, suppress the immune system and aid metabolism of fats, proteins and carbohydrates.<br><br>Defects in ACTH can cause obesity (MIM:601665) resulting in excessive accumulation of body fat (Challis et al. 2002, Millington 2013). Defects in ACTH can also cause pro-opiomelanocortinin deficiency (POMCD; MIM:609734) where affected individuals present early-onset obesity, adrenal insufficiency and red hair (Krude et al. 1998, Krude et al. 2003).
R-HSA-5579007	Defective ACY1 causes encephalopathy	Aminoacylase 1 (ACY1) is a cytosolic, homodimeric zinc-binding metalloenzyme with a wide range of tissue expression. It hydrolyses acylated L-amino acids (except L-aspartate) into L-amino acids and an acyl group. It can also hydrolyse N-acetylcysteine-S-conjugates. Defects in ACY1 can cause aminoacylase-1 deficiency (ACY1D; MIM:609924) resulting in encephalopathy, delay in psychomotor development, seizures and increased urinary excretion of several N-acetylated amino acids (Sass et al. 2006, Sass et al. 2007).
R-HSA-5578997	Defective AHCY causes Hypermethioninemia with S-adenosylhomocysteine hydrolase deficiency (HMAHCHD)	Adenosylhomocysteinase (AHCY) is a tetrameric, NAD+-bound, cytosolic protein that regulates all adenosylmethionine (AdoMet) dependent transmethylations by hydrolysing the feedback inhibitor adenosylhomocysteine (AdoHcy) to homocysteine (HCYS) and adenosine (Ade-Rib). Defects in AHCY cause Hypermethioninemia with S-adenosylhomocysteine hydrolase deficiency (HMAHCHD; MIM:613752), a metabolic disorder characterised by hypermethioninemia associated with failure to thrive, psychomotor retardation, facial dysmorphism with abnormal hair and teeth and myocardiopathy (Baric et al. 2004).
R-HSA-4549380	Defective ALG1 causes ALG1-CDG (CDG-1k)	Chitobiosyldiphosphodolichol beta-mannosyltransferase (ALG1) normally tranfers a mannose moiety to the lipid-linked oligosaccharide (LLO aka N-glycan precursor) which is required for subsequent N-glycosylation of proteins. Defects in ALG1 can cause congenital disorder of glycosylation 1k (ALG1-CDG, previously known as CDG1k; MIM:608540), a multisystem disorder characterised by under-glycosylated serum glycoproteins. CDG type 1 diseases result in a wide variety of clinical features, such as defects in the nervous system development, psychomotor retardation, dysmorphic features, hypotonia, coagulation disorders, and immunodeficiency. Compared to other CDGs, ALG1-CDG has a very severe phenotype, which can result in an early death (Schwarz et al. 2004, Kranz et al. 2004, Dupre et al. 2010).
R-HSA-4551295	Defective ALG11 causes ALG11-CDG (CDG-1p)	GDP-Man:Man(3)GlcNAc(2)-PP-Dol alpha-1,2-mannosyltransferase (ALG11) transfers the fourth and fifth mannoses (Man) to the N-glycan precursor in an alpha-1,2 orientation. These additions are the last two on the cytosolic side of the ER membrane before the N-glycan is flipped to the luminal side of the membrane. Recently discovered defects in ALG11 have been linked to congential disorder of glycosylation, type 1p (ALG11-CDG, CGD1p) (Rind et al. 2010, Thiel et al. 2012). The disease is a multi-system disorder characterised by under-glycosylated serum glycoproteins. Early-onset developmental retardation, dysmorphic features, hypotonia, coagulation disorders and immunodeficiency are reported features of this disorder (Rind et al. 2010, Thiel et al. 2012).
R-HSA-4720489	Defective ALG12 causes ALG12-CDG (CDG-1g)	Dol-P-Man:Man(7)GlcNAc(2)-PP-Dol alpha-1,6-mannosyltransferase (ALG12) (Chantret et al. 2002) normally tranfers the 8th mannose moiety to the lipid-linked oligosaccharide (LLO aka N-glycan precursor) which is required for subsequent N-glycosylation of proteins. Defects in ALG12 are associated with congenital disorder of glycosylation 1g (ALG12-CDG, CDG1g; MIM:607143), a multisystem disorder caused by a defect in glycoprotein biosynthesis and characterised by under-glycosylated serum glycoproteins (Chantret et al. 2002, Grubenmann et al. 2002). CDG type 1 diseases result in a wide variety of clinical features, such as defects in the nervous system development, psychomotor retardation, dysmorphic features, hypotonia, coagulation disorders, and immunodeficiency.
R-HSA-5633231	Defective ALG14 causes congenital myasthenic syndrome (ALG14-CMS)	UDP-N-acetylglucosamine transferase subunit ALG14 homolog (ALG14) forms a complex with ALG13 protein and is required for the addition of the second N-acetylglucosamine (GlcNAc) to the lipid linked oligosaccharide (LLO) intermediate (GlcNAcDOLDP) (Gao et al. 2005). Defects in ALG14 can cause congenital myasthenic syndrome (ALG14-CMS), which is due to a defect in neuromuscular signal transmission (Cossins et al. 2013). The most commonly affected muscles include proximal limb muscles. Mutations causing ALG14-CMS include p.P65L and p.R104* (Cossins et al. 2013).
R-HSA-4549349	Defective ALG2 causes ALG2-CDG (CDG-1i)	Alpha 1,3/1,6 mannosyltransferase ALG2 (ALG2) is a bifunctional mannosyltransferase normally tranfers a mannose moiety to the lipid linked oligosaccharide (LLO aka N glycan precursor) which is required for subsequent N glycosylation of proteins. Defects in ALG2 can cause congenital disorder of glycosylation 1i (ALG2-CDG, previously known as CDG1i; MIM:607906), a multisystem disorder characterised by under glycosylated serum glycoproteins. CDG type 1 diseases result in a wide phenotypic spectrum, from poor neurological development, psychomotor retardation and dysmorphic features to hypotonia, coagulation abnormalities and immunodeficiency (Thiel et al. 2003). Defect in ALG2 can also cause congenital myasthenic syndrome (ALG2-CMS), which is due to a defect in neuromuscular signal transmission (Cossins et al. 2013). The most commonly affected muscles include proximal limb muscles. Mutations causing ALG2-CMS include p.V68G and p.72_75delinsSPR (Cossins et al. 2013). 
R-HSA-4720475	Defective ALG3 causes ALG3-CDG (CDG-1d)	Dol-P-Man:Man(5)GlcNAc(2)-PP-Dol alpha-1,3-mannosyltransferase (ALG3) adds the sixth mannose (although the first to be derived from dolichyl-phosphate-mannose, DOLPman) to the lipid-linked oligosaccharide (LLO) intermediate GlcNAc(2) Man(5) (PPDol)1 (Korner et al. 1999). Defects in ALG3 are associated with congenital disorder of glycosylation 1d (ALG3-CDG, CDG1d; MIM:601110), a multisystem disorder caused by a defect in glycoprotein biosynthesis and characterised by under-glycosylated serum glycoproteins. CDG type 1 diseases result in a wide variety of clinical features, such as defects in the nervous system development, psychomotor retardation, dysmorphic features, hypotonia, coagulation disorders, and immunodeficiency (Sun et al. 2005).
R-HSA-4724289	Defective ALG6 causes ALG6-CDG (CDG-1c)	Dolichyl pyrophosphate Man9GlcNAc2 alpha-1,3-glucosyltransferase (ALG6) normally adds the first glucose moiety to the lipid-linked oligosaccharide precursor (LLO aka N-glycan precursor) which is required for subsequent N-glycosylation of proteins (Imbach et al. 1999). Defects in ALG6 can cause congenital disorder of glycosylation 1c (ALG6-CDG, CDG-1c; MIM:603147), a multisystem disorder characterised by under-glycosylated serum glycoproteins (Imbach et al. 1999, Imbach et al. 2000, Westphal et al. 2000, Sun et al. 2005). ALG6 deficiency is accompanied by an accumulation of the N-glycan precursor (GlcNAc)2 (Man)9 (PP-Dol)1 and is the second most common CDG disease subtype after PMM2-CDG (CDG-1a) (Imbach et al. 1999). CDG type 1 diseases result in a wide variety of clinical features, such as defects in the nervous system development, psychomotor retardation, dysmorphic features, hypotonia, coagulation disorders, and immunodeficiency.
R-HSA-4724325	Defective ALG8 causes ALG8-CDG (CDG-1h)	The probable dolichyl pyrophosphate Glc1Man9GlcNAc2 alpha-1,3-glucosyltransferase (ALG8) (Stanchi et al. 2001, Chantret et al. 2003) normally adds the second glucose moiety to the lipid-linked oligosaccharide precursor (LLO aka N-glycan precursor) which is required for subsequent N-glycosylation of proteins. Defects in ALG8 can cause congenital disorder of glycosylation 1h (ALG8-CDG, CDG-1h; MIM:608104), a multisystem disorder characterised by under-glycosylated serum glycoproteins (Chantret et al. 2003, Schollen et al. 2004). ALG8 deficiency is accompanied by an accumulation of the N-glycan precursor (Glc)1 (GlcNAc)2 (Man)9 (PP-Dol)1. CDG type 1 diseases result in a wide variety of clinical features, such as defects in the nervous system development, psychomotor retardation, dysmorphic features, hypotonia, coagulation disorders, and immunodeficiency.
R-HSA-4720454	Defective ALG9 causes ALG9-CDG (CDG-1l)	Alpha-1,2-mannosyltransferase ALG9 (ALG9) normally catalyses the transfer of mannose to the lipid-linked oligosaccharide (LLO) precursor. It adds the 7th and 9th mannose moieties to LLO. Defects in ALG9 are associated with congenital disorder of glycosylation 1l (ALG9-CDG, CDG1l; MIM:608776), a multisystem disorder caused by a defect in glycoprotein biosynthesis and characterised by under-glycosylated serum glycoproteins. CDG type 1 diseases result in a wide variety of clinical features, such as defects in the nervous system development, psychomotor retardation, dysmorphic features, hypotonia, coagulation disorders, and immunodeficiency (Frank et al. 2004, Weinstein et al. 2005). The LLO profile showed accumulation of (GlcNAc)2 (Man)6 (PP-Dol)1 and (GlcNAc)2 (Man)8 (PP-Dol)1 fragments, suggesting a defect in ALG9 and correlating with the normal function of ALG9 in adding the 7th and 9th mannose moieties (Frank et al. 2004).
R-HSA-3359462	Defective AMN causes hereditary megaloblastic anemia 1	Defects in AMN cause recessive hereditary megaloblastic anemia 1 (RH-MGA1 aka MGA1 Norwegian type or Imerslund-Grasbeck syndrome, I-GS; MIM:261100). The Norwegian cases described by Imerslund were due to defects in AMN (Imerslund 1960). The resultant malabsorption of Cbl (vitamin B12) leads to impaired B12-dependent folate metabolism and ultimately impaired thymine synthesis and DNA replication.
R-HSA-5619099	Defective AVP causes neurohypophyseal diabetes insipidus (NDI)	Arginine vasopressin (AVP(20-28)) is a 9 amino-acid long signal peptide produced by cleavage of the precursor protein AVP in the hypothalamus. It mediates the reabsorption of water in the kidney and its synthesis and release are physiologically regulated by plasma osmolarity, blood pressure and/or blood volume. AVP(20-28) binds to vasopressin receptors AVPR1 and 2, located on the basolateral surface of the kidney collecting duct. This binding results in interaction of AVPRs with the G protein alpha-s. Following a cascade of downstream events, ultimately the water channel aquaporin 2 (AQP2) translocates from intracellular stores to the apical surface where it functions as the entry site for water reabsorption. When water balance is achieved, plasma levels of AVP(20-28) drop and AQP2 levels in the apical plasma membrane are decreased.<br><br>Mutations in AVP make it unavailable to its AVPRs in the kidney, resulting in dysregulation of water reabsorption. This can cause familial neurohypophyseal diabetes insipidus (FNDI), an autosomal dominant disorder characterised by persistent excessive thirst resulting in constant drinking (polydipsia) and passage of large volumes of urine (polyuria). In FNDI, the production and release of AVP from the posterior pituitary gland is impaired (Moeller et al. 2013). 
R-HSA-4420332	Defective B3GALT6 causes EDSP2 and SEMDJL1	The biosynthesis of dermatan sulfate/chondroitin sulfate and heparin/heparan sulfate glycosaminoglycans (GAGs) starts with the formation of a tetrasaccharide linker sequence attached to the core protein. Beta-1,3-galactosyltransferase 6 (B3GALT6) is one of the critical enzymes involved in the formation of this linker sequence. Defects in B3GALT6 causes Ehlers-Danlos syndrome progeroid type 2 (EDSP2; MIM:615349), a severe disorder resulting in a broad spectrum of skeletal, connective tissue and wound healing problems. Defects in B3GALT6 can also cause spondyloepimetaphyseal dysplasia with joint laxity type 1 (SEMDJL1; MIM:271640), characterised by spinal deformaty and lax joints, especially of the hands and respiratory compromise resulting in early death (Nakajima et al. 2013, Malfait et al. 2013).
R-HSA-3560801	Defective B3GAT3 causes JDSSDHD	Galactosylgalactosylxylosylprotein 3-beta-glucuronosyltransferases1, 2 and 3 (B3GAT1-3) are involved in forming the linker tetrasaccharide present in heparan sulfate and chondroitin sulfate. Defects in B3GAT3 cause multiple joint dislocations, short stature, craniofacial dysmorphism, and congenital heart defects (JDSSDHD; MIM:245600). This is an autosomal recessive disease characterized by dysmorphic facies, elbow, hip and knee dislocations, clubfeet, short stature and cardiovascular defects (Steel & Kohl 1972, Bonaventure et al. 1992, Baasanjav et al. 2011). JDSSDHD has phenotypic similarities to Larsen syndrome (Larsen et al. 1950).
R-HSA-3656244	Defective B4GALT1 causes B4GALT1-CDG (CDG-2d)	Congenital disorders of glycosylation (CDG, previously called carbohydrate-deficient glycoprotein syndromes, CDGSs), are a group of hereditary multisystem disorders. They are characterized biochemically by hypoglycosylation of glycoproteins, diagnosed by isoelectric focusing (IEF) of serum transferrin. There are two types of CDG, types I and II. Type I CDG has defects in the assembly of lipid-linked oligosaccharides or their transfer onto nascent glycoproteins, whereas type II CDG comprises defects of trimming, elongation, and processing of protein-bound glycans. Clinical symptoms are dominated by severe psychomotor and mental retardation, as well as blood coagulation abnormalities (Jaeken 2013). B4GALT1-CDG (CDG type IId) is a multisystem disease, characterized by dysmorphic features, hydrocephalus, hypotonia and blood clotting abnormalities (Hansske et al. 2002).
R-HSA-4793953	Defective B4GALT1 causes B4GALT1-CDG (CDG-2d)	Congenital disorders of glycosylation (CDG, previously called carbohydrate-deficient glycoprotein syndromes, CDGSs), are a group of hereditary multisystem disorders. They are characterized biochemically by hypoglycosylation of glycoproteins, diagnosed by isoelectric focusing (IEF) of serum transferrin. There are two types of CDG, types I and II. Type I CDG has defects in the assembly of lipid-linked oligosaccharides or their transfer onto nascent glycoproteins, whereas type II CDG comprises defects of trimming, elongation, and processing of protein-bound glycans. Clinical symptoms are dominated by severe psychomotor and mental retardation, as well as blood coagulation abnormalities (Jaeken 2013). B4GALT1-CDG (CDG type IId) is a multisystem disease, characterized by dysmorphic features, hydrocephalus, hypotonia and blood clotting abnormalities (Hansske et al. 2002).
R-HSA-3560783	Defective B4GALT7 causes EDS, progeroid type	EhlersDanlos syndrome (EDS) is a group of inherited connective tissue disorders, caused by a defect in the synthesis of collagen types I or III. Abnormal collagen renders connective tissues more elastic. The severity of the mutation can vary from mild to life-threatening. There is no cure and treatment is supportive, including close monitoring of the digestive, excretory and particularly the cardiovascular systems. Defective B4GALT7, a galactosyltransferase important in proteoglycan synthesis, causes the progeroid variant of EDS (MIM:130070). Features include an aged appearance, developmental delay, short stature, generalized osteopenia, defective wound healing, hypermobile joints, hypotonic muscles, and loose but elastic skin (Okajima et al. 1999).
R-HSA-3371598	Defective BTD causes biotidinase deficiency	BTD deficiency is an autosomal recessive disorder in which the body is unable to recycle and reuse biotin (Btn). This results in a secondary Btn deficiency that leads to juvenile-onset multiple carboxylase deficiency (MIM:253260) (Wolf 2012, Wolf et al. 1983). Patients present with neurological and cutaneous symptoms, including seizures, hypotonia, skin rash, and alopecia, usually between the second and fifth months of life (Wolf 2010). Children with profound BTD deficiency are treated with pharmacological doses of biotin (5-20 mg daily). Neonatal screening for BTD deficiency is performed in most states of the United States and many other countries.
R-HSA-3359485	Defective CD320 causes methylmalonic aciduria	Defects in CD320 cause methylmalonic aciduria type TCblR (MMATC aka methylmalonic aciduria; MIM:613646) resulting in elevated methylmalonic acid (MMA) and homocysteine (HCYS) in newborns (Quadros et al. 2010).
R-HSA-5678895	Defective CFTR causes cystic fibrosis	Cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR) is a low conductance chloride-selective channel that mediates the transport of chloride ions in human airway epithelial cells. Chloride ions plays a key role in maintaining homoeostasis of epithelial secretions in the lungs. Defects in CFTR can cause cystic fibrosis (CF; MIM:602421), a common generalised disorder in Caucasians affecting the exocrine glands. CF results in an ionic imbalance that impairs clearance of secretions, not only in the lung, but also in the pancreas, gastrointestinal tract and liver. Wide-ranging manifestations of the disease include chronic lung disease, exocrine pancreatic insufficiency, blockage of the terminal ileum, male infertility and salty sweat. The median survival of CF patients in North America and Western Europe is around 40 years (Davis 2006, Radlovic 2012). 
R-HSA-3595174	Defective CHST14 causes EDS, musculocontractural type	Carbohydrate sulfotransferase 14 (CHST14 also known as D4ST-1) mediates the transfer of sulfate to position 4 of further N-acetylgalactosamine (GalNAc) residues of dermatan sulfate (DS). Defects in CHST14 cause Ehlers-Danlos syndrome, musculocontractural type (MIM:601776). The Ehlers-Danlos syndromes (EDS) are a group of connective tissue disorders that share common features such as skin hyperextensibility, articular hypermobility and tissue fragility (Beighton et al. 1998). The musculocontractural form of EDS (MIM:601776) include distinctive characteristics such as craniofacial dysmorphism, congenital contractures of fingers and thumbs, clubfeet, severe kyphoscoliosis and muscular hypotonia (Malfait et al. 2010).
R-HSA-3595172	Defective CHST3 causes SEDCJD	Carbohydrate sulfotransferase 3 (CHST3) transfers sulfate (SO4(2-)) to position 6 of N-acetylgalactosamine (GalNAc) residues of chondroitin-containg proteins resulting in chondroitin sulfate (CS), the predominant glycosaminoglycan present in cartilage. Defects in CHST3 result in spondyloepiphyseal dysplasia with congenital joint dislocations (SEDCJD; MIM:143095), a bone dysplasia clinically characterized by severe progressive kyphoscoliosis (abnormal curvature of the spine), arthritic changes with joint dislocations and short stature in adulthood (Unger et al. 2010).
R-HSA-3656225	Defective CHST6 causes MCDC1	Carbohydrate sulfotransferase 6 (CHST6) catalyzes the transfer of sulfate to position 6 of non-reducing ends of N-acetylglucosamine (GlcNAc) residues on keratan sulfate (KS). KS plays a central role in maintaining corneal transparency. Defective CHST6 (Nakazawa et al. 1984) results in unsulfated keratan deposited within the intracellular space and the extracellular corneal stroma leading to macular dystrophy, corneal type I (MCDC1; MIM:217800). MCDC1 is an early-onset, ocular disease characterized by bilateral, progressive corneal opacification, and reduced corneal sensitivity (Jones & Zimmerman 1961). MCD can be subdivided into 2 types on the basis of immunohistochemical studies and serum analysis for keratan sulfate; MCD type I, in which there is a virtual absence of sulfated KS-specific antibody response in the serum and cornea and MCD type II, in which the normal KS-specific antibody response is present in cornea and serum (Yang et al. 1988).
R-HSA-3595177	Defective CHSY1 causes TPBS	Chondroitin sulfate synthases (CHSY) are involved in the synthesis of chondroitin sulfate, adding alternatingly glucuronate (GlcA) and N-acetylgalactosamine (GalNAc) to the growing chondroitin polymer (Mizumoto et al. 2013). Defects in CHSY1 cause temtamy preaxial brachydactyly syndrome (TPBS; MIM:605282), a syndrome characterized by multiple congenital anomalies, mental retardation, sensorineural deafness, growth retardation and bilateral symmetric digital anomalies mainly in the form of preaxial brachydactyly (literally, shortness of fingers and toes) and hyperphalangism (Temtamy et al. 1998, Race et al. 2010, Tian et al. 2010).
R-HSA-5619060	Defective CP causes aceruloplasminemia (ACERULOP)	Ceruloplasmin (CP), synthesised in the liver and secreted into plasma, is a copper-binding (6-7 atoms per molecule) glycoprotein involved in iron trafficking in vertebrates. CP is essential for SLC40A1 (ferroportin) stability at the cell surface, the protein that mediates iron efflux from cells. CP also possesses ferroxidase activity, which oxidises ferrous iron (Fe2+) to ferric iron (Fe3+) following its transfer out of the cell. Fe3+ can then be loaded on to extracellular transferrin which transports it around the body to sites where it is required. Iron is vital for many metabolic processes such as electron transport and the transport and storage of oxygen.<br><br>Defects in CP (or indeed SLC40A1) can lead to the phenotype of iron overload as seen in the disorder aceruloplasminemia (ACERULOP; MIM:604290). It is a rare autosomal recessive disorder of iron metabolism characterised by iron accumulation mainly in the brain, but also in liver, pancreas and retina. Patients develop retinal degeneration, diabetes mellitus and neurological disturbance. ACERULOP belongs to a group of disorders known as NBIA (neurodegeneration with brain iron accumulation), distinguishing it from hereditary hemochromatosis (serum iron is high but the brain is usually not affected) and from disorders of copper metabolism such as Menkes and Wilson disease (Harris et al. 1995, Kono 2012, Musci et al. 2014).
R-HSA-5688890	Defective CSF2RA causes pulmonary surfactant metabolism dysfunction 4 (SMDP4)	Surfactant catabolism by alveolar macrophages plays a small but critical part in surfactant recycling and metabolism. Upon ligand binding, granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor receptor (GM-CSFR), a heterodimer of alpha (CSF2RA) and beta (CSF2RB) subunits, initiates a signalling process that not only induces proliferation, differentiation and functional activation of hematopoietic cells but can also determine surfactant uptake into alveolar macrophages and its degradation via clathrin-coated vesicles. Defects in human CSF2RA can cause pulmonary surfactant metabolism dysfunction 4 (SMDP4; MIM:300770, aka congenital pulmonary alveolar proteinosis, (PAP)), a rare lung disorder due to impaired surfactant homeostasis characterised by alveoli filling with floccular material. Cellular responses to the misfolded pro-SFTPC products include ER stress, the activation of reactive oxygen species and autophagy. Excessive lipoprotein accumulation in the alveoli results in a form of respiratory distress syndrome in premature infants (RDS; MIM:267450) (Whitsett et al. 2015).
R-HSA-5688849	Defective CSF2RB causes pulmonary surfactant metabolism dysfunction 5 (SMDP5)	Surfactant catabolism by alveolar macrophages plays a small but critical part in surfactant recycling and metabolism. Upon ligand binding, granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor receptor (GM-CSFR), a heterodimer of alpha (CSF2RA) and beta (CSF2RB) subunits, initiates a signalling process that not only induces proliferation, differentiation and functional activation of hematopoietic cells but can also determine surfactant uptake into alveolar macrophages and its degradation via clathrin-coated vesicles. Defects in human CSF2RB can cause pulmonary surfactant metabolism dysfunction 5 (SMDP5; MIM:614370, aka pulmonary alveolar proteinosis 5, PAP5), a rare lung disorder due to impaired surfactant homeostasis characterised by alveoli filling with floccular material causing respiratory failure (Greenhill & Kotton 2009, Whitsett et al. 2015).
R-HSA-3359463	Defective CUBN causes hereditary megaloblastic anemia 1	Defects in the CUBN gene cause recessive hereditary megaloblastic anemia 1 (RH-MGA1 aka MGA1 Finnish type or Imerslund-Grasbeck syndrome, I-GS; MIM:261100). The Finnish cases described by Grasbeck et al. were caused by defects in CUBN (Grasbeck et al. 1960). The resultant malabsorption of Cbl (cobalamin, vitamin B12) leads to impaired B12-dependent folate metabolism and ultimately impaired thymine synthesis and DNA replication.
R-HSA-5579026	Defective CYP11A1 causes Adrenal insufficiency, congenital, with 46,XY sex reversal (AICSR)	Cholesterol side-chain cleavage enzyme, mitochondrial (CYP11A1) normally catalyses the side-chain cleavage of cholesterol to form pregnenolone. Defects in CYP11A1 can cause Adrenal insufficiency, congenital, with 46,XY sex reversal (AICSR; MIM:613743). This is a rare disorder that can present as acute adrenal insufficiency in infancy with elevated ACTH and plasma renin activity and low or absent adrenal steroids. The severest phenotype is loss-of-function mutations associated with prematurity, complete under-androgenisation and severe, early-onset adrenal failure (Kim et al. 2008).
R-HSA-5579017	Defective CYP11B1 causes Adrenal hyperplasia 4 (AH4)	Cytochrome P450 11B1, mitochondrial (CYP11B1) possesses steroid 11-beta-hydroxylase activity which can convert 11-deoxycortisol to cortisol. 11-beta-hydroxylase deficiency is one of the main causes of congenital adrenal hyperplasia (CAH) (5-8%), second only to 21-hydroxylase deficiency which accounts for more than 90% of CAH (Zhao et al. 2008). Defects in CYP11B1 can cause Adrenal hyperplasia 4 (AH4; MIM:202010), a form of congenital adrenal hyperplasia which is a common recessive disease due to failure to convert 11-deoxycortisol to cortisol. This impaired corticosteroid biosynthesis results in androgen excess, virilization and hypertension (White et al. 1991). 
R-HSA-5579009	Defective CYP11B2 causes Corticosterone methyloxidase 1 deficiency (CMO-1 deficiency)	Cytochrome P450 11B2, mitochondrial (CYP11B2 aka aldosterone hydroxylase) is an enzyme necessary for aldosterone biosynthesis via corticosterone (CORST) and 18-hydroxycorticosterone (18HCORST). Defects in CYP11B2 results in disorders of aldosterone synthesis. Corticosterone methyloxidase 1 and 2 deficiencies (CMO-1; MIM:203400 and CMO-2 deficiency; MIM:61060) are autosomal recessive disorders of aldosterone biosynthesis (Mitsuuchi et al. 1993, Bureik et al. 2002). In CMO-1 deficiency, aldosterone is undetectable in plasma, while its immediate precursor, 18HCORST, is low or normal. In CMO-2 deficiency, aldosterone can be low or normal, but at the expense of increased secretion of 18HCORST. Patients with CMO-2 deficiency have elevated plasma 18-hydroxycorticosterone/aldosterone ratios.
R-HSA-5579028	Defective CYP17A1 causes Adrenal hyperplasia 5 (AH5)	Steroid 17-alpha-hydroxylase/17,20 lyase (CYP17A1) mediates both 17-alpha-hydroxylase and 17,20-lyase activity, allowing the adrenal glands and gonads to synthesise both 17-alpha-hydroxylated glucocorticoids and sex steroids respectively (Kagimoto et al. 1998). Defects in CYP17A1 can cause Adrenal hyperplasia 5 (AH5), a form of congenital adrenal hyperplasia (CAH), a common recessive disease due to defective synthesis of cortisol and sex steroids. Common symptoms include mild hypocortisolism, ambiguous genitalia in genetic males or failure of the ovaries to function at puberty in genetic females, metabolic alkalosis due to hypokalemia and low-renin hypertension. CYP17A1 can have defects in either or both of 17-alpha-hydroxylase and 17,20-lyase activities thus patients can show combined partial 17-alpha-hydroxylase/17,20-lyase deficiency or isolated 17,20-lyase deficiency traits (Yanase et al. 1992, Kater & Biglieri 1994, Fluck & Miller 2006, Miller 2012).
R-HSA-5579030	Defective CYP19A1 causes Aromatase excess syndrome (AEXS)	Aromatase (CYP19A1) catalyses the conversion of androstenedione (ANDST) to estrone (E1). Defects in CYP19A1 can cause aromatase excess syndrome (AEXS; MIM:139300) and aromatase deficiency (AROD; MIM:613546). Affected individuals cannot synthesise endogenous estrogens. In females the lack of estrogen leads to pseudohermaphroditism and progressive virilization at puberty, whereas in males pubertal development is normal (Bulun 2014).
R-HSA-5579000	Defective CYP1B1 causes Glaucoma	Cytochrome P450 1B1 (CYP1B1) can oxidise a variety of structurally unrelated compounds, including steroids, fatty acids, and xenobiotics as well as activating a range of procarcinogens. A specific substrate is the female sex hormone estradiol-17beta (EST17b) which is 4-hydroxylated to 4-hydroxyestradiol-17beta 4OH-EST17b). Defects in CYP1B1 can cause glaucoma disorders such as Glaucoma 3, primary congenital, A (GLC3A; MIM:231300), Glaucoma, primary open angle (POAG; MIM:137760), Glaucoma 1, open angle, A (GLC1A; MIM:137750) and Peters anomaly (PAN; MIM:604229). These disorders cause a progressive optic neuropathy characterised by visual field defects that ultimately lead to irreversible blindness (Li et al. 2011, Sarfarazi et al. 2003, Vincent et al. 2001).
R-HSA-5579021	Defective CYP21A2 causes Adrenal hyperplasia 3 (AH3)	Steroid 21-hydroxylase (CYP21A2) specifically catalyses the 21-hydroxylation of steroids which is required for the adrenal synthesis of mineralocorticoids and glucocorticoids. Defects in CYP21A2 can cause adrenal hyperplasia 3 (AH3; MIM:201910), a form of congenital adrenal hyperplasia (CAH) where cortisol synthesis is defective. This results in increased ACTH levels, causing overproduction and accumulation of cortisol precursors, particularly 17-hydroxyprogesterone (17HPROG). The resultant excessive production of androgens causes virilization. 21-hydroxylase deficiency accounts for more than 90% of CAH cases and ranges from mild to complete loss of activity (White et al. 2000, White & Bachega 2012).
R-HSA-5579010	Defective CYP24A1 causes Hypercalcemia, infantile (HCAI)	Catabolic inactivation of the active, hormonal form of vitamin D3 (calcitriol, CALTOL, 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D3) is initially carried out by 24-hydroxylation, mediated by 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D3 24-hydroxylase (CYP24A1). The product formed is eventually transformed to calcitroic acid, the major water-soluble metabolite that can be excreted in bile. Defects in CYP24A1 can cause hypercalcemia infantile (HCAI; MIM:143880), a disorder characterised by abnormally high level of calcium in the blood, failure to thrive, vomiting, dehydration, and nephrocalcinosis (Schlingmann et al. 2011).
R-HSA-5579015	Defective CYP26B1 causes Radiohumeral fusions with other skeletal and craniofacial anomalies (RHFCA)	Retinoic acid (RA) is a biologically active analogue of vitamin A (retinol). RA plays an important role in regulating cell growth and differentiation.CYP26A1 and B1 are involved in the metabolic breakdown of RA by 4-hydroxylation. High expression levels of CYP26B1 in the cerebellum and pons of human brain suggests a protective role of specific tissues against retinoid damage (White et al. 2000). Defects in CYP26B1 can cause radiohumeral fusions with other skeletal and craniofacial anomalies (RHFCA; MIM:614416), a disease characterised by craniofacial malformations and multiple skeletal anomalies (Laue et al. 2011).
R-HSA-5579004	Defective CYP26C1 causes Focal facial dermal dysplasia 4 (FFDD4)	Retinoic acid (RA) is a biologically active analogue of vitamin A (retinol). RA plays an important role in regulating cell growth and differentiation. CYP26C1 is involved in the metabolic breakdown of RA by 4-hydroxylation. While CYP26C1 can hydroxylate the trans form, it is unique in hydroxylating the 9-cis isomer of RA (9cRA) (Taimi et al. 2004). Defects in CYP26C1 can cause focal facial dermal dysplasia 4 (FFDD4; MIM:614974), a rare syndrome characterised by facial lesions.
R-HSA-5578996	Defective CYP27A1 causes Cerebrotendinous xanthomatosis (CTX)	CYP27A1, a mitochondrial matrix sterol hydroxylase, catalyses the 27-hydroxylation of side-chains of sterol intermediates (Cali et al. 1991). In the bile acid synthesis pathway, CYP27A1 catalyses the first step in the oxidation of the side chain of sterol intermediates such as cholestane-triols (Pikuleva et al. 1998). Defects in CYP27A1 can cause Cerebrotendinous xanthomatosis (CTX; MIM:213700), a rare sterol storage disorder. Decreased bile acid production results in the accumulation of sterol intermediates in many tissues, including brain. The disorder is characterised by progressive neurologic dysfunction, premature atherosclerosis and cataracts (Gallus et al. 2006). <br>
R-HSA-5579014	Defective CYP27B1 causes Rickets vitamin D-dependent 1A (VDDR1A)	Vitamin D3 (cholecalciferol), synthesised in human skin by ultraviolet radiation action on 7-dehydrocholesterol, does not possess any biological activity. Vitamin D hormonal activity requires hydroxylation at the 25 and 1-alpha positions by cytochrome P450 enzymes CYP2R1 and CYP27B1 respectively. Vitamin D 25-hydroxylase (CYP2R1) catalyses the hydroxylation of vitamin D3 to calcidiol (CDL). Subsequent 1-alpha-hydroxylation of CDL by CYP27B1 produces calcitriol (CTL). CTL binds and activates the nuclear vitamin D receptor, with subsequent regulation of physiologic events such as calcium homeostasis, cellular differentiation and proliferation.<br><br>Defects in CYP27B1 can cause rickets, vitamin D-dependent 1A (VDDR1A; MIM:264700), a disorder caused by deficiency of the active form of vitamin D (CTL) resulting in defective bone mineralization and clinical features of rickets. To date, 47 mutations have been identified, the majority of them (28) being missense mutations (Kim 2011, Cui et al. 2012).
R-HSA-5579027	Defective CYP2R1 causes Rickets vitamin D-dependent 1B (VDDR1B)	Vitamin D3 (cholecalciferol), synthesised in human skin by ultraviolet radiation action on 7-dehydrocholesterol, does not possess any biological activity. Vitamin D hormonal activity requires hydroxylation at the 25 and 1-alpha positions by cytochrome P450 enzymes CYP2R1 and CYP27B1 respectively.<br>Vitamin D 25-hydroxylase (CYP2R1) catalyses the hydroxylation of vitamin D3 to calcidiol (CDL). Subsequent 1-alpha-hydroxylation of CDL produces calcitriol (CTL). CTL binds and activates the nuclear vitamin D receptor, with subsequent regulation of physiologic events such as calcium homeostasis, cellular differentiation and proliferation.<br><br>Defects in CYP2R1 can cause rickets, vitamin D-dependent 1B (VDDR1B; MIM:600081), a disorder caused by a selective deficiency of the active form of vitamin D (CTL) resulting in defective bone mineralization and clinical features of rickets (Pikuleva et al. 2013).
R-HSA-5579011	Defective CYP2U1 causes Spastic paraplegia 56, autosomal recessive (SPG56)	Cytochrome P450 2U1 (CYP2U1) catalyses the hydroxylation of arachidonic acid, docosahexaenoic acid and other long chain fatty acids, generating bioactive eicosanoid derivatives which may play an important physiological role in fatty acid signaling processes. Defects in CYP2U1 can cause Spastic paraplegia 56, autosomal recessive (SPG56; MIM:615030), a neurodegenerative disorder characterised by a slow, gradual, progressive weakness and spasticity of the lower limbs (Tesson et al. 2012, Fink 2013).
R-HSA-5579005	Defective CYP4F22 causes Ichthyosis, congenital, autosomal recessive 5 (ARCI5)	Cytochrome P450 4F22 (CYP4F22) is thought to 20-hydroxylate trioxilin A3 (TrXA3), an intermediary metabolite from the 12(R)-lipoxygenase pathway. This pathway is implicated in proliferative skin diseases. The major products of arachidonic acid in keratinocytes are 12- and 15-HETE which undergo biotransformation to products involved in skin hydration. CYP4F22 mutations can lead to autosomal recessive congenital ichthyosis 5 (ARCI5) (Lefevre et al. 2006, Lugassy et al. 2008).
R-HSA-5579013	Defective CYP7B1 causes Spastic paraplegia 5A, autosomal recessive (SPG5A) and Congenital bile acid synthesis defect 3 (CBAS3)	Bile acids are synthesised from cholesterol via two pathways - a classic neutral pathway involving cholesterol 7-alpha-hydroxylase (CYP7A1), and an acidic pathway involving 25-hydroxycholesterol 7-alpha-hydroxylase (CYP7B1). Defects in CYP7B1 can cause spastic paraplegia 5A (SPG5A), a neurodegenerative disorder characterised by a slow, gradual, progressive weakness and spasticity of the lower limbs (Tsaousidou et al. 2008). Defects in CYP7B1 can also cause Congenital bile acid synthesis defect 3 (CBAS3; MIM:613812), a disorder resulting in severe cholestasis, cirrhosis and liver synthetic failure. Hepatic CYP7B1 activity is undetectable (Setchell et al. 1998).
R-HSA-4755609	Defective DHDDS causes retinitis pigmentosa 59	The ER membrane-associated enzyme dehydrodolichyl diphosphate synthase (DHDDS) (Endo et al. 2003) normally mediates the sequential head-to-tail cis addition of multiple isopentyl pyrophosphate (IPP) molecules to farnesyl pyrophosphate (E,E-FPP) to produce polyprenol pyrophosphate (pPPP) (Shridas et al. 2003). Dolichol in humans contain homologues ranging from 17-23 isoprene units, the most common homologues contain 19 or 20 isoprene units (Freeman et al. 1980). Dolichol is an important substrate in the N-glycosylation of proteins, including rhodopsin.<br><br>Defects in DHDDS cause retinitis pigmentosa 59 (RP59; MIM:613861), a pigment retinopathy, characterised by retinal pigment deposits (visible on fundus examination) and primary loss of rod photoreceptors followed by secondary loss of cone photoreceptors. Sufferers typically have night vision blindness and loss of mid to peripheral vision. As the condition progresses, they lose far peripheral vision and eventually central vision (Zuchner et al. 2011).
R-HSA-4755583	Defective DOLK causes DOLK-CDG (CDG-1m)	Dolichol kinase (DOLK, TMEM15) normally mediates the phosphorylation of dolichol (DCHOL) to form dolichyl phosphate (DOLP) in the ER membrane (Fernandez et al. 2002). DOLP is an important substrate in the synthesis of N- and O-glycosylated proteins and GPI anchors. Defects in DOLK cause congenital disorder of glycosylation type 1m (DOLK-CDG, CDG1m, also known as dolichol kinase deficiency; MIM:610768), a severe mutisystem disorder characterised by under-glycosylated serum glycoproteins. This disorder has a very severe phenotype and death can occur in early life (Kranz et al. 2007).
R-HSA-4549356	Defective DPAGT1 causes DPAGT1-CDG (CDG-1j) and CMSTA2	UDP-N-acetylglucosamine--dolichyl-phosphate N-acetylglucosaminephosphotransferase (DPAGT1) catalyses the initial committed step in the biosynthesis of dolichyl pyrophosphate-oligosaccharides. Defects in DPAGT1 cause congenital disorder of glycosylation 1j (DPAGT1-CDG, previously known as CDG-1j; MIM:608093), a multisystem disorder characterised by under-glycosylated serum glycoproteins (Wu et al. 2003, Timal et al. 2012). Congenital disorders of glycosylation result in a wide variety of clinical features, such as defects in the nervous system development, psychomotor retardation, dysmorphic features, hypotonia, coagulation disorders, and immunodeficiency. Defects in DPAGT1 can also cause myasthenic syndrome, congenital, with tubular aggregates, 2 (CMSTA2; MIM:614750), characterised by muscle weakness of mainly the proximal limb muscles, with tubular aggregates present on muscle biopsy. Sufferers find walking difficult and fall frequently. Younger sufferers show hypotonia and poor head control. A disorder of neuromuscular transmission is detected on electromyography (Belaya et al. 2012, Finlayson et al. 2013).
R-HSA-4717374	Defective DPM1 causes DPM1-CDG (CDG-1e)	Dolichyl-phosphate mannosyltransferase (DPM), a heterotrimeric protein embedded in the endoplasmic reticulum membrane, mediates the transfer of mannose (from cytosolic GDP-mannose) to dolichyl phosphate (DOLP) to form dolichyl-phosphate-mannose (DOLPman). The first subunit of the heterotrimer (DPM1) appears to be the actual catalyst, and the other two subunits (DPM2 and 3) appear to stabilise it (Maeda et al. 2000). Defects in DPM1 can cause congenital disorder of glycosylation 1e (DPM1-CDG, CDG-1e; MIM:608799), a multisystem disorder caused by a defect in glycoprotein biosynthesis and characterised by under-glycosylated serum glycoproteins (Kim et al. 2000, Imbach et al. 2000, Garcia-Silva et al. 2004).
R-HSA-4719377	Defective DPM2 causes DPM2-CDG (CDG-1u)	Dolichyl-phosphate mannosyltransferase (DPM), a heterotrimeric protein embedded in the endoplasmic reticulum membrane, mediates the transfer of mannose (from cytosolic GDP-mannose) to dolichyl phosphate (DOLP) to form dolichyl-phosphate-mannose (DOLPman). The first subunit of the heterotrimer (DPM1) appears to be the actual catalyst, and the other two subunits (DPM2 and 3) appear to stabilise it (Maeda et al. 2000). Defects in DPM2 can cause congenital disorder of glycosylation 1u (DPM2-CDG, CDG1u; MIM:615042), a multisystem disorder caused by a defect in glycoprotein biosynthesis and characterised by under-glycosylated serum glycoproteins (Barone et al. 2012). CDG type 1 diseases result in a wide variety of clinical features, such as defects in the nervous system development, psychomotor retardation, dysmorphic features, hypotonia, coagulation disorders, and immunodeficiency.
R-HSA-4719360	Defective DPM3 causes DPM3-CDG (CDG-1o)	Dolichyl-phosphate mannosyltransferase (DPM), a heterotrimeric protein embedded in the endoplasmic reticulum membrane, mediates the transfer of mannose (from cytosolic GDP-mannose) to dolichyl phosphate (DOLP) to form dolichyl-phosphate-mannose (DOLPman). The first subunit of the heterotrimer (DPM1) appears to be the actual catalyst, and the other two subunits (DPM2 and 3) appear to stabilise it (Maeda et al. 2000). Defects in DPM3 can cause congenital disorder of glycosylation 1o (DPM3-CDG, CDG1o; MIM:612937), a multisystem disorder caused by a defect in glycoprotein biosynthesis and characterised by under-glycosylated serum glycoproteins. CDG type 1 diseases result in a wide variety of clinical features, such as defects in the nervous system development, psychomotor retardation, dysmorphic features, hypotonia, coagulation disorders, and immunodeficiency (Lefeber et al. 2009).<br><br>Four biosynthetic pathways depend on DOLPman; N-glycosylation, O-mannosylation, C-Mannosylation and GPI-anchor biosynthesis. A defect in DPM3 strongly reduces O-mannosylation of alpha-dystroglycan, explaining the clinical phenotype of muscular dystrophy and linking the congenital disorders of glycosylation with the dystroglycanopathies (Lefeber et al. 2009).
R-HSA-3656253	Defective EXT1 causes exostoses 1, TRPS2 and CHDS	Heparan sulfate (HS) is involved in regulating various body functions functions during development, homeostasis and pathology including blood clotting, angiogenesis and metastasis of cancer cells. Exostosin 1 and 2 (EXT1 and 2) glycosyltransferases are required to form HS. They are able to transfer N-acetylglucosamine (GlcNAc) and glucuronate (GlcA) to HS during its synthesis. The functional form of these enzymes appears to be a complex of the two located on the Golgi membrane. Defects in either EXT1 or EXT2 can cause hereditary multiple exostoses 1 (Petersen 1989) and 2 (McGaughran et al. 1995) respectively (MIM:133700 and MIM:133701), autosomal dominant disorders characterized by multiple projections of bone capped by cartilage resulting in deformed legs, forearms and hands. Trichorhinophalangeal syndrome, type II (TRPS2 aka Langer-Giedion syndrome, LGS) is a disorder that combines the clinical features of trichorhinophalangeal syndrome type I (TRPS1, MIM:190350) and multiple exostoses type I, caused by mutations in the TRPS1 and EXT1 genes, respectively (Langer et al. 1984, Ludecke et al. 1995). Defects in EXT1 may also be responsible for chondrosarcoma (CHDS; MIM:215300) (Schajowicz & Bessone 1967, Hecht et al. 1995).
R-HSA-3656237	Defective EXT2 causes exostoses 2	Heparan sulfate (HS) is involved in regulating various body functions during development, homeostasis and pathology including blood clotting, angiogenesis and metastasis of cancer cells. Exostosin 1 and 2 (EXT1 and 2) glycosyltransferases are required to form HS. They are able to transfer N-acetylglucosamine (GlcNAc) and glucuronate (GlcA) to HS during its synthesis. The functional form of these enzymes appears to be a complex of the two located on the Golgi membrane. Defects in either EXT1 or EXT2 can cause hereditary multiple exostoses 1 (Petersen 1989) and 2 (McGaughran et al. 1995) respectively (MIM:133700 and MIM:133701), autosomal dominant disorders characterised by multiple projections of bone capped by cartilage resulting in deformed legs, forearms and hands.
R-HSA-5579019	Defective FMO3 causes Trimethylaminuria (TMAU)	Trimethylamine (TMA) is present in the diet (in fish) but primarily formed in vivo from the breakdown of choline. It is N-oxidised by FMO3 in the liver, the major isoform active towards TMA. Trimethylaminuria (TMAU; MIM:602079, fish-odour syndrome) is a human genetic disorder characterised by an impaired ability to convert the malodourous TMA to its odourless N-oxide. Patients emit a foul odour, which resembles that of rotting fish and can be a psychologically disabling condition (Messenger et al. 2013).
R-HSA-5609977	Defective GALE can cause Epimerase-deficiency galactosemia (EDG)	Cytosolic UDP-galactose 4'-epimerase (GALE) catalyses the reversible interconversion of UDP-D-galactose (UDP-Gal) and UDP-glucose (UDP-Glc), the third reacton in the Leloir pathway of galactose metabolism. GALE can also catalyse the epimerisation of UDP-N-acetylglucosamine to UDP-N-acetylgalactosamine. The active form of the enzyme is a homodimer with one molecule of bound NAD per monomer (GALE:NAD+ dimer). Defects in GALE can cause Epimerase-deficiency galactosemia (EDG; MIM:230350), or type III galactosemia (diseases of galactose metabolism) whose clinical features include early-onset cataracts, liver damage, deafness and mental retardation. Historically, it was considered that there were two forms of GALE deficidency; a benign ("peripheral") form where there is no GALE activity in red blood cells and characterised by mild symptoms (Gitzelmann 1972) and a rarer "generalised" form with no detectable GALE activity in all tissues resulting in more severe symptoms (Holton et al. 1981). The disease is now considered to be a continuum (Openo et al. 2006). 
R-HSA-5609976	Defective GALK1 can cause Galactosemia II (GALCT2)	Cytosolic galactokinase (GALK1) catalyses the first committed step in the Leloir pathway of galactose metabolism. GALK1 catalyses the phosphorylation of D-galactose (Gal) to form D-galactose 1-phosphate (Gal1P). Defects in GALK1 can cause type II galactosemia (GALCT2; MIM:230200), an autosomal recessive deficiency characterised by congenital cataracts during infancy and presenile cataracts in the adult population. Galactitol accumulation in the lens is the cause of these cataracts (Bosch et al. 2002).
R-HSA-5609978	Defective GALT can cause Galactosemia	Galactose-1-phosphate uridylyltransferase (GALT) is one of the enzymes involved in galactose metabolism in the Leloir pathway. GALT catalyses the transfer of uridine monophosphate (UMP) from UDP-glucose (UDP-Glc) to galactose-1-phosphate (Gal1P) to form UDP-galactose (UDP-Gal) and glucose 1-phosphate. Defects in GALT can cause Galactosemia (GALCT; MIM:230400), an autosomal recessive disorder of galactose metabolism presenting in neonatals that causes jaundice, cataracts and mental retardation (Bosch 2006).
R-HSA-5619073	Defective GCK causes maturity-onset diabetes of the young 2 (MODY2)	Cytosolic glucokinase (GCK) (and three isoforms of hexokinase) catalyse the irreversible reaction of alpha-D-glucose (Glc) and ATP to form alpha-D-glucose-6-phosphate (G6P) and ADP, the first step in glycolysis. In the body, GCK is found only in hepatocytes and pancreatic beta cells. GCK and the hexokinase enzymes differ in that GCK has a higher Km than the hexokinases and is less readily inhibited by the reaction product. As a result, GCK should be inactive in the fasting state when glucose concentrations are low but in the fed state should have an activity proportional to glucose concentration. These features are thought to enable efficient glucose uptake and retention in the liver, and to function as a sensor of glucose concentration coupled to insulin release in pancreatic beta cells. Defects in GCK are can cause maturity-onset diabetes of the young 2 (MODY2; MIM:125851), a heritable early onset form of type II diabetes (Hussain 2010, Osbak et al. 2009).
R-HSA-5578999	Defective GCLC causes Hemolytic anemia due to gamma-glutamylcysteine synthetase deficiency (HAGGSD)	In mammalian cells, many antioxidant defence systems exist which protect cells from subsequent exposure to oxidant stresses. One antioxidant is glutathione (GSH), a tripeptide present in virtually all cells that regulates the intracellular redox state and protects cells from oxidative injury. It is metabolised via the gamma-glutamyl cycle, which is catalysed by six enzymes. In man, hereditary deficiencies have been found in five of the six enzymes. Gamma-glutamylcysteine ligase (GCL) catalyses the first and rate-limiting step in GSH biosynthesis. GCL is a heterodimer of a catalytic heavy chain (GCLC) and a regulatory light chain (GCLM). Defects in the catalytic GCLC can cause hemolytic anemia due to gamma-glutamylcysteine synthetase deficiency (HAGGSD; MIM:230450), a disease characterised by hemolytic anemia, glutathione deficiency, myopathy, late-onset spinocerebellar degeneration, and peripheral neuropathy (Ristoff & Larsson 2007, Aoyama & Nakaki 2013).
R-HSA-4085023	Defective GFPT1 causes CMSTA1	Glucosamine-fructose 6-phosphate aminotransferases 1 and 2 (GFPT1,2) are the first and rate-limiting enzymes in the hexosamine synthesis pathway, and thus formation of hexosamines like N-acetylglucosamine (GlcNAc). These enzymes probably play a role in limiting the availability of substrates for the N- and O-linked glycosylation of proteins. GFPT1 and 2 are required for normal functioning of neuromuscular synaptic transmission. Defects in GFPT1 lead to myasthenia, congenital, with tubular aggregates 1 (CMSTA1; MIM:610542), characterised by altered muscle fibre morphology and impaired neuromuscular junction development. Sufferers of CMSTA1 show a good response to acetylcholinesterase inhibitors (Senderek et al. 2011). The missense mutations observed do not always result in significant reduction in enzyme activity, but biopsies show reduced amounts of GFPT1 protein suggesting increased turnover or defective translation (Senderek et al. 2011).
R-HSA-5579022	Defective GGT1 causes Glutathionuria (GLUTH)	To be excreted in urine, glutathione conjugates undergo several hydrolysis steps to form mercapturic acids which are readily excreted. The first step is the hydrolysis of a gamma-glutamyl residue from the conjugate catalysed by gamma-glutamyltransferases (GGTs). These are membrane-bound, heterodimeric enzymes composed of light and heavy peptide chains. Extracellular glutathione (GSH) or its conjugates can be hydrolysed to give cysteinylglycine (CG, or CG conjugates) and free glutamate (L-Glu). Hydrolysis of GSH provides cells with a local cysteine supply and contributes to intracellular GSH levels (Heisterkamp et al. 2008). Defects in GGT1 can cause glutathionuria (GLUTH; MIM:231950), an autosomal recessive disorder characterised by increased GSH concentration in the plasma and urine. Mutations that cause GLUTH can occur in both chains of the GGT1 dimer (Heisterkamp et al. 2008, Aoyama & Nakaki 2013).
R-HSA-3359457	Defective GIF causes intrinsic factor deficiency	Defects in GIF cause hereditary intrinsic factor deficiency (IFD, aka congenital pernicious anemia; MIM:261000). IFD is an autosomal recessive disorder characterized by megaloblastic anemia (Tanner et al. 2005).
R-HSA-4085011	Defective GNE causes sialuria, Nonaka myopathy and inclusion body myopathy 2	Sialuria (MIM:269921) is caused by a metabolic defect where the UDP?N?acetylglucosamine 2?epimerase, N?acetylmannosamine kinase (GNE) gene lacks feedback inhibition resulting in constitutive overproduction of free sialic acid (Neu5Ac) (Montreuil et al. 1968, Fontaine et al. 1968). Sialuria is characterised by a large cytoplasmic accumulation and urinary excretion of Neu5Ac (Kamerling et al. 1979). Sialurias differ from sialidoses, in which there is storage and excretion of 'bound' Neu5Ac. Defects in GNE also cause Nonaka myopathy (NK; MIM:605820), an early adult-onset disorder characterised by muscle weakness and wasting of distal muscles, especially the anterior tibial muscles (Nonaka et al. 1981, Asaka et al. 2001). Defects in GNE also cause inclusion body myopathy 2 (IBM2; MIM:600737), an autosomal recessive disorder with a similar phenotype to Nonaka myopathy (NK). IBM2 is an adult-onset, proximal and distal muscle weakness and wasting disorder. Muscle biospsy reveals from sufferers shows a rimmed vacuole myopathy and the degenerating muscle fibers contained abnormal amounts of beta-amyloid protein such as that found in neurodegenerative diorders. However, there is no neurological symptoms in these patients (Argov & Yarom 1984).
R-HSA-5579006	Defective GSS causes Glutathione synthetase deficiency (GSS deficiency)	In mammalian cells, many antioxidant defence systems exist which protect cells from subsequent exposure to oxidant stresses. One antioxidant is glutathione (GSH), a tripeptide present in virtually all cells that regulates the intracellular redox state and protects cells from oxidative injury. It is metabolised via the gamma-glutamyl cycle, which is catalysed by six enzymes. In man, hereditary deficiencies have been found in five of the six enzymes. Glutathione synthetase deficiency is the most frequently recognised disorder. Defects in GSS can cause glutathione synthetase deficiency (GSSD aka 5-oxoprolinase deficiency, MIM:266130), a severe autosomal recessive disorder characterised by an increased rate of haemolysis, 5-oxoprolinuria, CNS damage and recurrent bacterial infections. In this condition, decreased levels of cellular glutathione result in overstimulation of gamma-glutamylcysteine synthesis and its subsequent conversion to 5-oxoproline. Glutathione synthetase deficiency can be classed as mild, moderate or severe (Ristoff & Larsson 2007, Aoyama & Nakaki 2013).
R-HSA-5619056	Defective HK1 causes hexokinase deficiency (HK deficiency)	Cytosolic hexokinase 1 (HK1), together with isoforms HK2 and 3 and glucokinase (GCK), catalyse the irreversible reaction of alpha-D-glucose (Glc) and ATP to form alpha-D-glucose-6-phosphate (G6P) and ADP, the first step in glycolysis. HK1 is the predominant isoform of the different HKs in tissues that utilise glucose for their physiological function such as brain, lymphocytes, erythrocytes, platelets and fibroblasts. Defects in HK1 can cause hexokinase deficiency (HK deficiency; MIM:235700), a rare, autosomal recessive disease with nonspherocytic hemolytic anemia as the predominant clinical feature (Kanno 2000).
R-HSA-3371599	Defective HLCS causes multiple carboxylase deficiency	Defects in HLCS causes holocarboxylase synthetase deficiency (HLCS deficiency aka early onset multiple carboxylase deficiency; MIM:253270). HLCS deficiency is an autosomal recessive disorder whereby deficient HLCS activity results in reduced activity of all five biotin-dependent carboxylases. Symptoms include metabolic acidosis, organic aciduria, lethargy, hypotonia, convulsions and dermatitis (Suzuki et al. 2005). Patients can present symptoms shortly after birth to up to early childhood and will be prescribed oral biotin supplements, typically 10-20 mg daily. Two classes of HLCS deficiency have been reported depending on whether patients respond to biotin therapy. Most patients respond favourably to treatment and show complete reversal of biochemical and clinical symptoms (Morrone et al. 2002, Dupuis et al. 1999). Here mutations in the HLCS active site cause a reduced affinity for biotin that can be overcome by pharmacological doses of the vitamin (Pendini et al. 2008). Patients who display incomplete responsiveness to biotin therapy have a poor long-term prognosis (Bailey et al. 2008). Here mutations that reside outside of the enzyme's active site have no effect on biotin binding but do compromise the protein-protein interaction between the HLCS and its substrates, resulting in reduced biotinylation of all five carboxylases thus reducing their enzymatic activity (Mayende et al. 2012).
R-HSA-3359458	Defective LMBRD1 causes methylmalonic aciduria and homocystinuria type cblF	Defects in LMBRD1 cause methylmalonic aciduria and homocystinuria type cblF (MMAHCF; MIM:277380), characterised biochemically by decreased levels of the coenzymes adenosylcobalamin (AdoCbl) and methylcobalamin (MetCbl) (Rutsch et al. 2009, Gailus et al. 2010).
R-HSA-4793950	Defective MAN1B1 causes MRT15	Endoplasmic reticulum mannosyl-oligosaccharide 1,2-alpha-mannosidase (MAN1B1) normally trims single mannose residues from misfolded glycoproteins, targeting them for degradation and thus providing a quality control process for N-glycoyslated proteins. Defects in MAN1B1 can cause mental retardation, autosomal recessive 15 (MRT15; MIM:614202), a disorder resulting in nonsyndromic moderate to severe mental retardation. It is characterised by significantly below average intellectual functioning associated with impaired adaptative behaviour during the developmental period (Rafiq et al. 2010, Rafiq et al. 2011).
R-HSA-5579012	Defective MAOA causes Brunner syndrome (BRUNS)	Amine oxidase (flavin-containing) A (MAOA) catalyses the oxidative deamination of biogenic and dietary amines, the regulation of which is critical for mental state homeostasis. MAOA, located on the mitochondrial outer membrane and requiring FAD as cofactor (Weyler 1989), preferentially oxidises biogenic amines such as 5-hydroxytryptamine (5HT), dopamine, noradrenaline and adrenaline. Defects in MAOA can cause Brunner syndrome (BRUNS; MIM:300615), a form of X-linked non-dysmorphic mild mental retardation. Male patients are affected by mild mental retardation and exhibit abnormal behaviour, including impulsive aggression (Brunner et al. 1993, Shih et al. 1999, Shih 2004).
R-HSA-5579024	Defective MAT1A causes Methionine adenosyltransferase deficiency (MATD)	S-adenosylmethionine (AdoMet, SAM) is an important methyl donor in most transmethylation reactions. S-adenosylmethionine synthase isoform type-1 (MAT1A) catalyses the formation of AdoMet from methionine and ATP. Defects in MAT1A can cause methionine adenosyltransferase deficiency (MATD; MIM:250850), an inborn error of metabolism resulting in hypermethioninemia. In this condition, methionine accumulates because its conversion to AdoMet is impaired (Furujo et al. 2012, Mudd 2011).
R-HSA-4793952	Defective MGAT2 causes MGAT2-CDG (CDG-2a)	Alpha-1,6-mannosyl-glycoprotein 2-beta-N-acetylglucosaminyltransferase (MGAT2) normally catalyses the transfer of a GlcNAc moiety onto the alpha-1,6 mannose of an alpha-1,4 branch of oligomannose N-glycans to form complex N-glycans (Tan et al. 1995). Defects in MGAT2 are associated with congenital disorder of glycosylation type IIa (MGAT2-CDG, CDG-2a; MIM:212066), a multisystem disorder caused by a defect in glycoprotein biosynthesis and characterised by under-glycosylated serum glycoproteins (Tan et al. 1996, Cormier-Daire et al. 2000, Alkuraya 2010, Alazami et al. 2012). Type II CDGs refer to defects in the trimming and processing of protein-bound glycans.
R-HSA-3359475	Defective MMAA causes methylmalonic aciduria type cblA	Defects in MMAA cause methylmalonic aciduria type cblA (cblA aka methylmalonic aciduria type A or vitamin B12-responsive methylmalonic aciduria of cblA complementation type; MIM:251100). Affected individuals accumulate methylmalonic acid in the blood and urine and are prone to potentially life threatening acidotic crises in infancy or early childhood (Dobson et al. 2002, Lerner-Ellis et al. 2004).
R-HSA-3359471	Defective MMAB causes methylmalonic aciduria type cblB	Defects in MMAB cause methylmalonic aciduria type cblB (cblB aka methylmalonic aciduria type B or vitamin B12 responsive methylmalonicaciduria of cblB complementation type; MIM:251110). Affected individuals have methylmalonic aciduria and episodes of metabolic ketoacidosis, despite a functional methylmalonyl CoA mutase. In severe cases, newborns become severely acidotic and may die if acidosis is not treated promptly (Dobson et al. 2002).
R-HSA-3359474	Defective MMACHC causes methylmalonic aciduria and homocystinuria type cblC	Defects in MMACHC cause methylmalonic aciduria and homocystinuria type cblC (MMAHCC; MIM:277400). MMAHCC is the most common disorder of cobalamin metabolism and is characterized by decreased levels of the coenzymes adenosylcobalamin (AdoCbl) and methylcobalamin (MeCbl). Affected individuals may have developmental, haematologic, neurologic, metabolic, ophthalmologic, and dermatologic clinical findings (Lerner-Ellis et al. 2006).
R-HSA-3359473	Defective MMADHC causes methylmalonic aciduria and homocystinuria type cblD	Defects in MMADHC cause methylmalonic aciduria and homocystinuria type cblD (MMAHCD; MIM:277410), a disorder of cobalamin metabolism characterized by decreased levels of the coenzymes adenosylcobalamin (AdoCbl) and methylcobalamin (MeCbl) (Coelho et al. 2008).
R-HSA-4793954	Defective MOGS causes MOGS-CDG (CDG-2b)	After the lipid-linked oligosaccharide (LLO) precursor is attached to the protein, the outer alpha-1,2-linked glucose is removed by by mannosyl-oligosaccharide glucosidase (MOGS). This is a mandatory step for protein folding control and glycan extension. Defects in MOGS are associated with congenital disorder of glycosylation type IIb (CDGIIb), a multisystem disorder caused by a defect in glycoprotein biosynthesis and characterised by under-glycosylated serum glycoproteins (De Praeter et al. 2000, Voelker et al. 2002). Type II CDGs refer to defects in the trimming and processing of protein-bound glycans.
R-HSA-4687000	Defective MPDU1 causes MPDU1-CDG (CDG-1f)	Mannose-P-dolichol utilisation defect 1 protein (MPDU1) is required for the efficient utilisation of the mannose donor dolichyl-phospho-mannose (DOLPman) in the synthesis of both lipid-linked oligosaccharides (LLOs) and glycosylphosphatidylinositols. Defects in MPDU1 can cause congenital disorder of glycosylation 1f (MPDU1-CDG, CDG-1f; MIM:609180), a multisystem disorder caused by a defect in glycoprotein biosynthesis and characterised by under-glycosylated serum glycoproteins. CDG type 1 diseases result in a wide phenotypic spectrum, such as poor neurological development, psychomotor retardation, dysmorphic features, hypotonia, coagulation abnormalities and immunodeficiency. In this condition, DOLPman is no longer utilised in transferase reactions extending LLOs, even as substrate levels and transferase enzyme activities appear normal (Anand et al. 2001, Schenk et al. 2001).
R-HSA-4043916	Defective MPI causes MPI-CDG (CDG-1b)	Mannose 6-phosphate isomerase (MPI) normally isomerises fructose 6-phosphate (Fru6P) to mannose 6-phosphate (Man6P) in the cytosol. Man6P is a precursor in the synthesis of GDP-mannose and dolichol-phosphate-mannose, required for mannosyl transfer reactions in the N-glycosylation of proteins. Defects in MPI cause congenital disorder of glycosylation 1b (MPI-CDG, previously known as CDG1b,; MIM:602579), a multisystem disorder characterised by under-glycosylated serum glycoproteins (Schollen et al. 2000). Unlike PMM2-CDG (CDG1a), there is no neurological involvement with MPI-CDG. Instead, patients present predominantly with diarrhoea, failure to thrive and protein-losing enteropathy (Pelletier et al. 1986). MPI-CDG is one of two CDGs that can be treated with oral mannose supplementation, but can be fatal if left untreated (Marquardt & Denecke 2003).
R-HSA-3359469	Defective MTR causes methylmalonic aciduria and homocystinuria type cblG	Defects in MTR cause methylcobalamin deficiency type G (cblG; MIM:250940), an autosomal recessive inherited disease that causes mental retardation, macrocytic anemia, and homocystinuria (Leclerc et al. 1996, Gulati et al. 1996, Watkins et al. 2002).
R-HSA-3359467	Defective MTRR causes methylmalonic aciduria and homocystinuria type cblE	Defects in MTRR cause methylcobalamin deficiency type E (cblE; methionine synthase reductase deficiency; MIM:236270) (Wilson et al. 1999). Patients with cblE exhibit megaloblastic anemia and hyperhomocysteinemia. SAM is used as a methyl donor in many biological reactions and demethylation of SAM produces S-adenosylhomocysteine, which is deadenosylated to form homocysteine. Homocysteine remethylation is carried out by MTR, which requires MTRR to maintain enzyme-bound cobalamin (Cbl) in its active form; but in cblE patients, MTR becomes inactivated and thus homocysteine accumulates.
R-HSA-3359478	Defective MUT causes methylmalonic aciduria mut type	Defects in MUT cause methylmalonic aciduria, mut type (MMAM; MIM:251000), an often fatal disorder of organic acid metabolism (Worgan et al. 2006).
R-HSA-4341670	Defective NEU1 causes sialidosis	Sialidases have important roles in the degradation of glycoconjugates by removing terminal sialic acid residues.<br>Defects in sialidase 1 (NEU1) cause sialidosis, a lysosomal storage disease characterised by the progressive lysosomal storage of sialidated glycopeptides and oligosaccharides and the accumulation and excretion of N-acetylneuraminic acid (Neu5Ac) covalently-linked ('bound') glycoconjugates (Lowden & O'Brien 1979). The sialidoses are distinct from the sialurias in which there is storage and excretion of 'free' Neu5Ac. Sialidosis manifests into types I and II forms. Type I is the milder form, also known as the 'normosomatic' type or the cherry red spot-myoclonus syndrome. Sialidosis type II is the more severe form with an earlier onset, and is also known as the 'dysmorphic' type.
R-HSA-5578998	Defective OPLAH causes 5-oxoprolinase deficiency (OPLAHD)	The gamma-glutamyl cycle is a six-enzyme cycle that represents the primary pathway for glutathione synthesis and degradation. One step is the cleavage of 5-oxo-L-proline (OPRO) to form L-glutamate, coupled to the hydrolysis of ATP. This is catalysed by 5-oxoprolinase (OPLAH) is a homodimeric, cytosolic protein. Defects in OPLAH can cause 5-oxoprolinase deficiency (OPLAHD; MIM:260005), an extremely rare disorder of the gamma-glutamyl cycle about which debate continues as to whether it is a disorder or just a biochemical condition with no adverse clinical effects apart from 5-oxoprolinuria (Calpena et al. 2013, Almaghlouth et al. 2012, Aoyama & Nakaki 2013).
R-HSA-3560796	Defective PAPSS2 causes SEMD-PA	Defects in PAPSS2 cause spondyloepimetaphyseal dysplasia Pakistani type (SEMD-PA; MIM:612847), a bone disease characterized by epiphyseal dysplasia with mild metaphyseal abnormalities. Clinical features include short stature from birth, short and bowed lower limbs, mild brachydactyly, kyphoscoliosis, abnormal gait and enlarged knee joints. Some patients may manifest premature pubarche and hyperandrogenism (Ahmed et al. 1998, Noordam et al. 2009, Miyake et al. 2012).
R-HSA-5609974	Defective PGM1 causes PGM1-CDG (CDG1t)	Phosphoglucomutases 1 and 2 (PGM1, 2) are involved in the cytosolic biosynthesis of nucleotide sugars needed for glycan biosynthesis, specifically, the isomerisation of glucose-6-phosphate (G6P) into glucose-1-phosphate (G1P). Defects in PGM1 can cause congenital disorder of glycosylation 1t (CDG1t, now known as PGM1-CDG; MIM:614921), a broad spectrum disorder characterised by under-glycosylated serum glycoproteins (Timal et al. 2012, Tegtmeyer et al. 2014). CDGs result in a wide variety of clinical features such as defects in nervous system development, psychomotor retardation, dysmorphic features, hypotonia, coagulation disorders, and immunodeficiency. 
R-HSA-4043911	Defective PMM2 causes PMM2-CDG (CDG-1a)	Phosphomannomutase 2 (PMM2) normally catalyses the isomerisation of mannose 6-phosphate (Man6P) to mannose 1-phosphate (Man1P) in the cytosol of cells. Man1P is a precursor in the synthesis of GDP-mannose and dolichol-phosphate-mannose, required for critical mannosyl transfer reactions in the N-glycosylation of proteins. Mutations in the PMM2 gene are one of the causes of Jaeken syndrome, a congenital disorder of glycosylation type 1a (PMM2-CDG, previously CDG-1a) (Matthijs et al. 1997). PMM2-CDG was first described in Belgian identical twin sisters, characterized by psychomotor retardation and multiple serum glycoprotein abnormalities. Serum and CSF transferrin were found to be deficient in sialic acid (Jaeken et al. 1984). PMM2-CDG is the most common CDG disease subtype.
R-HSA-5688031	Defective pro-SFTPB causes pulmonary surfactant metabolism dysfunction 1 (SMDP1) and respiratory distress syndrome (RDS)	Pulmonary surfactant-associated protein B (SFTPB), amongst other roles, is a component of surfactant, a surface-active film that helps reduce surface tension in alveoli. Defects in the SFTPB gene result in loss-of-function SFTPB proteins and accumulation of partially-processed , inactive pro-SFTPC in alveoli. Defects in SFTPB can cause pulmonary surfactant metabolism dysfunction 1 (SMDP1; MIM:265120), a rare lung disorder due to impaired surfactant homeostasis characterised by alveoli filling with floccular material. Excessive lipoprotein accumulation in the alveoli results in a form of respiratory distress syndrome in premature infants (RDS; MIM:267450) (Vorbroker et al. 1995, Li et al. 2004, Wert et al. 2009, Whitsett et al. 2015).
R-HSA-5688354	Defective pro-SFTPC causes pulmonary surfactant metabolism dysfunction 2 (SMDP2) and respiratory distress syndrome (RDS)	Pulmonary surfactant-associated protein C (SFTPC), amongst other roles, is a component of surfactant, a surface-active film that helps reduce surface tension in alveoli. Defects in the SFTPC gene result in protein misfolding, misrouting and/or misprocessing resulting in accumulation of partially-processed, inactive pro-SFTPC in alveoli causing cell toxicity. Defects in SFTPC can cause pulmonary surfactant metabolism dysfunction 2 (SMDP2; MIM:610913), a rare lung disorder due to impaired surfactant homeostasis characterised by alveoli filling with floccular material. Cellular responses to the misfolded pro-SFTPC products include ER stress, the activation of reactive oxygen species and autophagy. Excessive lipoprotein accumulation in the alveoli results in a form of respiratory distress syndrome in premature infants (RDS; MIM:267450) (Thomas et al. 2002, Mulugeta et al. 2005, Thurm et al. 2013, Whitsett et al. 2015).
R-HSA-4570571	Defective RFT1 causes RFT1-CDG (CDG-1n)	The N-glycan precursor is flipped across the ER membrane, moving it from the cytosolic side to the ER lumenal side. The exact mechanism of this translocation is not well understood but protein RFT1 homolog (RFT1) is known to be involved (Helenius et al. 2002). Defects in RFT1 are associated with congenital disorder of glycosylation 1n (RFT1-CDG, CDG-1n). The disease is a multi-system disorder characterised by under-glycosylated serum glycoproteins. Early-onset developmental retardation, dysmorphic features, hypotonia, coagulation disorders and immunodeficiency are reported features of this disorder (Haeuptle et al. 2008).
R-HSA-5619042	Defective RHAG causes regulator type Rh-null hemolytic anemia (RHN)	Rhesus (Rh) blood group antigens consist of several membrane-associated polypeptides including RHAG, which is required for cell-surface expression of the complex. The Rh(null) phenotype arises from missing or severely deficient Rh antigens and sufferers present a clinical syndrome of varying severity characterised by abnormalities of red cell shape, cation transport and membrane phospholipid organisation. The human gene RHAG encodes a Rhesus blood group family type A glycoprotein (belonging to the SLC42 solute transporter family) which is expressed specifically in erythroid cells. A transport function for RHAG is suggested to mediate ammonium (NH4+) export from these cells and prevent toxic build-up of NH3/NH4+ (Westhoff et al. 2002, Ripoche et al. 2004). Defects in RHAG are the cause of regulator type Rh-null hemolytic anemia (RHN, Rh-deficiency syndrome). RHN is a form of chronic hemolytic anemia (Huang & Ye 2010).
R-HSA-5687868	Defective SFTPA2 causes idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF)	One function of the pulmonary collectins, surfactant proteins A1, A2, A3 and D (SFTPAs, D), is that they influence surfactant homeostasis, contributing to the physical structures of lipids in the alveoli and to the regulation of surfactant function and metabolism. They are directly secreted from alveolar type II cells into the airway to function as part of the surfactant. The mechanism of secretion is unknown. Mutations in SFTPA2 disrupt protein structure and the defective protein is retained in the ER membrane causing idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF; MIM:178500). IPF is one of a family of idiopathic pneumonias sharing clinical features of shortness of breath, formation of scar tissue and varying degrees of inflammation and/or fibrosis on lung biopsy. IPF is typically progressive, leading to death from respiratory failure within 2-5 years of diagnosis in the majority of instances (Meltzer & Noble 2008, Noble & Barkauskas 2012).
R-HSA-5619048	Defective SLC11A2 causes hypochromic microcytic anemia, with iron overload 1 (AHMIO1)	The primary site for absorption of dietary iron is the duodenum. Ferrous iron (Fe2+) is taken up from the gut lumen across the apical membranes of enterocytes and released into the portal vein circulation across basolateral membranes. The human gene SLC11A2 encodes the divalent cation transporter DCT1 (NRAMP2, Natural resistance-associated macrophage protein 2). DCT1 resides on the apical membrane of enterocytes and mediates the uptake of many metal ions, particularly ferrous iron, into these cells. Defects in SLC11A2 can cause hypochromic microcytic anemia, with iron overload 1 (AHMIO1; MIM:206100), a blood disorder characterised by high serum iron, large hepatic iron deposition, abnormal haemoglobin content in erythrocytes which are reduced in size and absence of sideroblasts and stainable bone marrow iron store (Shawki et al. 2012, Iolascon & De Falco 2009).
R-HSA-5619104	Defective SLC12A1 causes Bartter syndrome 1 (BS1)	The solute carrier family 12 member 1 (SLC12A1, NKCC2) is a kidney-specific, membrane-bound protein that cotransports two Cl- ions electroneutrally into cells with a Na+ ion and a K+ ion and plays a vital role in the regulation of ionic balance and cell volume. Defects in SLC12A1 can cause Bartters syndrome (BS1; MIM:601678), an autosomal-recessive disease salt-wasting disorder characterised by renal tubular hypokalaemia, metabolic alkalosis and hypercalciuria. Clinical features present in infancy and include muscle weakness, anorexia, polydipsia, polyuria, failure to thrive and mental and growth retardation (Favero et al. 2011, Gagnon & Delpire 2013).
R-HSA-5619087	Defective SLC12A3 causes Gitelman syndrome (GS)	The SLC12A3 gene encodes for the Thiazide-sensitive sodium-chloride cotransporter (TSC). TSC mediates sodium and chloride removal from the distal convoluted tubule of the kidney. Defects in SLC12A3 are the cause of Gitelman syndrome (GS aka familial hypokalemic hypomagnesemia; MIM:263800). GS is an autosomal recessive disorder characterised by hypokalemic metabolic alkalosis, hypomagnesemia, and hypocalciuria. Patients can present with periods of muscular weakness and tetany, usually accompanied by abdominal pain, vomiting and fever. GS has overlapping features with Bartter syndrome (caused by defects in SLC12A1). This cotransporter is the major target for thiazide-type diuretics, used in the treatment of hypertension, extracellular fluid overload and renal stone disease (Nakhoul et al. 2012).
R-HSA-5619039	Defective SLC12A6 causes agenesis of the corpus callosum, with peripheral neuropathy (ACCPN)	K+/Cl- cotransport is implicated not only in regulatory volume decrease, but also in transepithelial salt absorption, renal K+ secretion, myocardial K+ loss during ischemia and regulation of neuronal Cl- concentration. Four genes (SLC12A4-7) encode the K+/Cl- cotransporters KCC1-4 respectively. Cotransport of K+ and Cl- is electroneutral with a 1:1 stoichiometry. These cotransporters function as homomultimers or heteromultimers with other K+/Cl- cotransporters. SLC12A6 encodes KCC3 which is highly expressed in heart, brain, spinal cord, kidney, muscle, pancreas and placenta. Defects in SLC12A6 are a cause of agenesis of the corpus callosum with peripheral neuropathy (ACCPN; MIM:218000), a autosomal recessive disease characterised by severe progressive sensorimotor neuropathy, mental retardation, dysmorphic features and variable degree of agenesis of the corpus callosum (Howard et al. 2002, Dupre et al. 2003, Salin-Cantegrel et al. 2011).
R-HSA-5619070	Defective SLC16A1 causes symptomatic deficiency in lactate transport (SDLT)	Four members of the SLC16A gene family encode classical monocarboxylate transporters MCT1-4. Widely expressed, they all function as proton-dependent transporters of monocarboxylic acids such as lactate and pyruvate and ketone bodies such as acetacetate and beta-hydroxybutyrate. These processes are crucial in the regulation of energy metabolism and acid-base homeostasis.<br><br>SLC16A1 encodes MCT1, a ubiquitiously expressed protein. Heterozygous defects in SLC16A1 were found in patients with symptomatic deficiency in lactate transport (SDLT aka erythrocyte lactate transporter defect; MIM:245340), resulting in an acidic intracellular environment and muscle degeneration with the release of myoglobin and creatine kinase (Merezhinskaya et al. 2000). This defect could compromise extreme performance in otherwise healthy individuals.<br><br>SLC16A1 is essential for lactate transport in muscle cells. It is also highly enriched in astrocytes and oligodendroglia, neuroglia that support, insulate and provide energy metabolites to axons. Oligodendroglia dysfunction can lead to axon degeneration in several diseases. The cause is unknown but disruption of SLC16A1 transporter produces axon damage and neuron loss in animal and cell culture models. In humans, this transporter is reduced in patients with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (Lee et al. 2012).<br><br>In cancer cells, a common change is the upregulation of glycolysis. The anti-cancer drug candidate 3-bromopyruvate (3-BrPA) can inhibit glycolysis through its uptake into cancer cells via SLC16A1 so it is the main determinant of 3-BrPA sensitivity in these cells (Birsoy et al. 2013).
R-HSA-5619035	Defective SLC17A5 causes Salla disease (SD) and ISSD	SLC17A5 encodes a lysosomal sialic acid transporter, sialin (AST, membrane glycoprotein HP59) which exports sialic acid (N-acetylneuraminic acid, Neu5Ac) derived from the degradation of glycoconjugates from lysosomes. This export is dependent on the proton electrochemical gradient across the lysosomal membrane. SLC17A5 is present in the pathological tumor vasculature of the lung, breast, colon, and ovary, but not in the normal vasculature, suggesting that the protein may be critical to pathological angiogenesis. Sialin is not expressed in a variety of normal tissues, but is significantly expressed in human fetal lung. Defects in SLC17A5 cause Salla disease (SD) and infantile sialic acid storage disorder (ISSD aka N-acetylneuraminic acid storage disease, NSD). These diseases belong to the sialic acid storage diseases (SASDs) and are autosomal recessive neurodegenerative disorders characterised by hypotonia, cerebellar ataxia and mental retardation with patients excreting large amounts of free Neu5Ac in urine. ISSD is a severe infantile form of SASD with a more severe clinical course than SD (Verheijen et al. 1999, Aula et al. 2000).
R-HSA-5619076	Defective SLC17A8 causes autosomal dominant deafness 25 (DFNA25)	There are two classes of glutamate transporters; the excitatory amino acid transporters (EAATs) which depend on an electrochemical gradient of Na+ ions and vesicular glutamate transporters (VGLUTs) which are proton-dependent. Together, these transporters uptake and release glutamate to mediate this neurotransmitter's excitatory signal and are part of the glutamate-glutamine cycle. Three members of the SLC17A gene family (7, 6 and 8) encode VGLUTs 1-3 respectively. This uptake is thought to be coupled to the proton electrochemical gradient generated by the vacuolar type H+-ATPase. They are all expressed in the CNS in neuron-rich areas but SLC17A8 (VGLUT3) is also expressed on astrocytes and in the liver and kidney. Defects in SLC17A8 can cause autosomal dominant deafness 25 (DFNA25; MIM:605583), a form of non-syndromic sensorineural hearing loss. The cochlea expresses SLC17A8 and in mice which lack this transporter are congenitally deaf. Hearing loss is due to the lack of glutamate release by inner hair cells therefore a loss of synaptic transmission at the IHC-afferent nerve synapse. Successful restoration of hearing by gene replacement in mice could be a significant advance toward gene therapy of human deafness (Ruel et al. 2008, Akil et al. 2012).
R-HSA-5619067	Defective SLC1A1 is implicated in schizophrenia 18 (SCZD18) and dicarboxylic aminoaciduria (DCBXA)	There are two classes of glutamate transporters; the excitatory amino acid transporters (EAATs) which depend on an electrochemical gradient of Na+ ions and vesicular glutamate transporters (VGLUTs) which are proton-dependent. Together, these transporters uptake and release glutamate to mediate this neurotransmitter's excitatory signal and are part of the glutamate-glutamine cycle.<br><br>The SLC1 gene family includes five high-affinity glutamate transporters encoded by SLC1, 2, 3, 6 and 7. These transporters can mediate transport of L-Glutamate (L-Glu), L-Aspartate (L-Asp) and D-Aspartate (D-Asp) with cotransport of 3 Na+ ions and H+ and antiport of a K+ ion. This mechanism allows glutamate into cells against a concentration gradient. This is a crucial factor in the protection of neurons against glutamate excitotoxicity (the excitation of nerve cells to their death) in the CNS (Zhou & Danbolt 2014).<br><br>SLC1A1 encodes an excitatory amino-acid carrier 1 (EAAC1, also called EAAT3) and is abundant particularly in brain but also in kidney, liver, muscle, ovary, testis and in retinoblastoma cell lines. In the kidney, SLC1A1 is present at apical membranes of proximal tubes where it serves as a major route of glutamate and aspartate reuptake from urine. Defects in SLC1A1 are the cause of dicarboxylic aminoaciduria (DCBXA; MIM:222730), an autosomal recessive glutamate-aspartate transport defect in the kidney and intestine (Bailey et al. 2011). Mutations that can cause DCBXA are R445W and I395del (Bailey et al. 2011).<br><br>A defect in SLC1A1 is also implicated in schizophrenia 18 (SCZD18; MIM:615232). Schizophrenia (SCZD; MIM:181500) is a complex, multifactorial psychotic disorder characterised by disturbances in the form and content of thought, in mood, in sense of self and relationship to the external world and in behaviour. It ranks amongst the world's top 10 causes of long-term disability. At the neuropathological level, SCZD appears to be characterised by synaptic deficits, alterations in glutamate and dopamine neurotransmission and hypofrontality (a state of decreased cerebral blood flow (CBF) in the prefrontal cortex of the brain). Variations in the SLC1A1 gene can confer susceptibility to SCZD18 (Harris et al. 2013). In the remote Pacific island of Palau, the risk of SCZD is 2-3 times the worldwide rate. In a 5-generation Palauan family, an 84kb deletion was carried by psychosis patients and proposed to increase the disease risk more than 18-fold for family members (Myles-Worsley et al. 2013).
R-HSA-5619062	Defective SLC1A3 causes episodic ataxia 6 (EA6)	There are two classes of glutamate transporters; the excitatory amino acid transporters (EAATs) which depend on an electrochemical gradient of Na+ ions and vesicular glutamate transporters (VGLUTs) which are proton-dependent. Together, these transporters uptake and release glutamate to mediate this neurotransmitter's excitatory signal and are part of the glutamate-gluatamine cycle.<br><br>The SLC1 gene family includes five high-affinity glutamate transporters encoded by SLC1, 2, 3, 6 and 7. These transporters can mediate transport of L-Glutamate (L-Glu), L-Aspartate (L-Asp) and D-Aspartate (D-Asp) with cotransport of 3 Na+ ions and H+ and antiport of a K+ ion. This mechanism allows glutamate into cells against a concentration gradient. This is a crucial factor in the protection of neurons against glutamate excitotoxicity (the excitation of nerve cells to their death) in the CNS (Zhou & Danbolt 2014).<br><br>SLC1A3 is highly expressed in the cerebellum but also found in the frontal cortex, hippocampus and basal ganglia. Defects in SLC1A3 have been shown to cause episodic ataxia type 6 (EA6; MIM:612656) where mutations in SLC1A3 can lead to decreased glutamate uptake, thus contributing to neuronal hyperexcitability to cause seizures, hemiplegia and episodic ataxia (Jen et al. 2005, de Vries et al. 2009).
R-HSA-5619111	Defective SLC20A2 causes idiopathic basal ganglia calcification 1 (IBGC1)	The genes SLC20A1 and SLC20A2 encode for phosphate transporters 1 and 2 (PiT1 and PiT2 respectively). They both have a broad tissue distribution and may play a general housekeeping role in phosphate transport such as absorbing phosphate from interstitial fluid and in extracellular matrix and cartilage calcification as well as in vascular calcification. <br>They possess Na+-coupled phosphate (Pi) cotransporter function with a stoichiometry of 2:1 (Na+:Pi). Defects in SLC20A2 can cause idiopathic basal ganglia calcification 1 (IBGC1; MIM:213600), an autosomal dominant disorder characterised by vascular and pericapillary calcification by calcium phosphate in the basal ganglia and other brain regions. Affected individuals can either be asymptomatic or show a wide spectrum of neuropsychiatric symptoms including parkinsonism and dementia (Wang et al. 2012, Hsu et al. 2013, Ashtari et al. 2013, Forster et al. 2013).
R-HSA-5619071	Defective SLC22A12 causes renal hypouricemia 1 (RHUC1)	Urate is a naturally occurring product of purine metabolism and is a scavenger of biological oxidants. Uric acid readily precipitates out of aqueous solutions causing gout and kidney stones. Due to this ability, changes in urate levels are implicated in numerous disease processes. The human gene SLC22A12 encodes urate transporter 1 (URAT1), predominantly expressed in the kidney and is involved in the regulation of blood urate levels. This transport can be trans-stimulated by organic anions such as L-lactate (LACT). Defects in SLC22A12 result in idiopathic renal hypouricaemia 1 (RHUC1; MIM:220150), a disorder characterised by impaired urate reabsorption at the apical membrane of proximal renal tubule cells and high urinary urate excretion (Wakida et al. 2005, Esparza Martin & Garcia Nieto 2011).
R-HSA-5619066	Defective SLC22A18 causes lung cancer (LNCR) and embryonal rhabdomyosarcoma 1 (RMSE1)	The human gene SLC22A18 (aka TSSC5) encodes organic cation transporter-like protein 2 (ORCTL2). It is expressed at high levels in kidney, liver and colon and at lower levels in heart, brain and lung. ORCTL2 can transport organic cations such as chloroquine and quinidine with the antiport of protons.<br><br>The human chromosome region 11p15.5 is linked with Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome (associated with susceptibility to Wilms' tumor, rhabdomyosarcoma and hepatoblastoma). SLC22A18 is located in this region (Cooper et al. 1998, Lee et al. 1998). Mutations and/or reduced expression of SLC22A18 have been found in certain tumors such as lung cancer (LNCR; MIM:211980) (Lee et al. 1998) and embryonal rhabdomyosarcoma 1 (RMSE1; MIM:268210) (Schwienbacher et al. 1998). How SLC22A18 might be involved in growth regulation is poorly understood. There is speculation that it may be involved in resistance to chemotherapy drugs and/or in the export of genotoxic substances whose retention may increase the risk of tumor formation.
R-HSA-5619053	Defective SLC22A5 causes systemic primary carnitine deficiency (CDSP)	The human SLC22A5,15 and 16 genes encode for sodium-dependent, high affinity carnitine cotransporters which maintain systemic and tissue concentrations of carnitine. Carnitine is essential for beta-oxidation of long-chain fatty acids to produce ATP. SLC22A5 encodes the organic cation/carnitine transporter 2 (OCTN2). SLC22A5 is strongly expressed in the kidney, skeletal muscle, heart and placenta. Defects in SLC22A5 are the cause of systemic primary carnitine deficiency (CDSP; MIM:212140), an autosomal recessive disorder of fatty-acid oxidation caused by defective carnitine transport resulting in cardiac, skeletal, or metabolic symptoms. If diagnosed early, all clinical symptoms can be completely reversed with a carnitine supplement. However, if left untreated, patients will develop lethal heart failure (Shibbani et al. 2014, Tamai 2013).
R-HSA-5619077	Defective SLC24A1 causes congenital stationary night blindness 1D (CSNB1D)	Five members of the NCKX (SLC24) family are all able to exchange one Ca2+ and one K+ for four Na+. SLC24A1 encodes an exchanger protein NCKX1 which is the most extensively studied member and is highly expressed in the eye. The light-induced lowering of calcium by efflux via this protein plays a key role in the process of light adaptation (Schnetkamp 2013). Defects in SLC24A1 can cause congenital stationary night blindness 1D (CSNB1D), an autosomal recessive, non-progressive retinal disorder characterised by impaired night vision and characterised by a Riggs-type of electroretinogram (Riazuddin et al. 2010).
R-HSA-5619055	Defective SLC24A4 causes hypomineralized amelogenesis imperfecta (AI)	The five members of the NCKX (SLC24) family are all able to exchange one Ca2+ and one K+ for four Na+. SLC24A4 encodes an exchanger protein NCKX4 which may play a role in calcium transport during amelogenesis (the process of formation of tooth enamel). SLC24A4 is upregulated in ameloblasts during the maturation stage of amelogenesis (Hu et al. 2012). Defects in SLC24A4 can cause hypomineralised amelogenesis imperfecta (AI), an autosomal recessive disorder in which tooth enamel formation fails. Screening of AI families identified mutations which severely diminish or abolish transport function of SLC24A4 (Parry et al. 2013, Wang et al. 2014).<br><br>Genetic variants in SLC24A4 define the skin/hair/eye pigmentation variation locus 6 (SHEP6; MIM:210750). In a genomewide association scan of thousands of Icelanders and Dutch, Sulem et al. found a strong association between the T allele of a SNP in the SLC24A4 gene and blond versus brown hair and blue versus green eyes (Sulem et al. 2007).
R-HSA-5619036	Defective SLC24A5 causes oculocutaneous albinism 6 (OCA6)	Five members of the NCKX (SLC24) family are all able to exchange one Ca2+ and one K+ for four Na+. SLC24A5 (NCKX5, located on the trans-Golgi membrane) is the prediminant K+-dependent Na+/Ca2+ exchanger in melanocytes and is one of a handful of genes thought to play a role in determining human skin colour (Wilson et al. 2013). Defects in SLC24A5 can cause oculocutaneous albinism 6 (OCA6; MIM:113750), a disorder characterised by a reduction or complete loss of melanin in the skin, hair and eyes. Patients with this condition show accompanied eye symptoms (Kamaraj & Purohit 2014, Morice-Picard et al. 2014).
R-HSA-3560792	Defective SLC26A2 causes chondrodysplasias	The SLC26A1 and 2 genes encode sulfate transporter proteins that facilitate sulfate uptake into cells, critical in cartilage for sulfation of proteoglycans and extracellular matrix organization. Defects in SLC26A2 result in impaired SO4(2-) transport leading to insufficient sulfation of cartilage proteoglycans. Defective SLC26A2 is implicated in the pathogenesis of a spectrum of autosomal recessive human chondrodysplasias. Severity of symptoms range from mild (diastrophic dysplasia; MIM:222600), intermediate (atelosteogenesis type II; MIM256050) to severe (achondrogenesis type 1B; MIM:600972) (Superti-Furga et al. 1996, Dwyer et al. 2010, Dawson & Markovich 2005).
R-HSA-5619085	Defective SLC26A3 causes congenital secretory chloride diarrhea 1 (DIAR1)	Solute carrier (SLC) genes that code chloride (Cl-)/bicarbonate (HCO3-) exchanger proteins are the SLC4 and SLC26 families. The chloride anion exchanger SLC26A3 (aka down-regulated in adenoma, DRA) mediates electrolyte and fluid absorption in the colon. It is also localised to the midpiece tail membrane of sperm where it plays a role in Cl-/HCO3- homeostasis during sperm epididymal maturation. Defects in SLC26A3 cause congenital chloride diarrhea 1 (DIAR1), a disease characterised by watery stools containing an excess of chloride resulting in dehydration, hypokalemia, and metabolic alkalosis (Alper & Sharma 2013, Wedenoja et al. 2011).
R-HSA-5619046	Defective SLC26A4 causes Pendred syndrome (PDS)	Solute carrier (SLC) genes that code chloride (Cl-)/bicarbonate (HCO3-) exchanger proteins are in the SLC4 and SLC26 families. SLC26A4 (pendrin) is thought to act as a chloride/anion exchanger but in the thyroid and inner ear, it also contributes to the conditioning of the endolymphatic fluid by mediating iodide (I-) transport. Defects in SLC26A4 can cause Pendred syndrome (PDS; MIM:274600), an autosomal recessive disorder characterised by congenital sensorineural hearing loss in association with thyroid goiter (Choi et al. 2011, Pesce & Kopp 2014).
R-HSA-5619108	Defective SLC27A4 causes ichthyosis prematurity syndrome (IPS)	The SLC27 gene family code for fatty acid transport proteins (FATPs). Long chain fatty acids (LCFAs) are critical for many physiological and cellular processes as a primary energy source. Of the six FATPs characterised, three have been shown to mediate the influx of LCFAs into cells; FATP1, 4 and 6. SLC27A4 (FATP4) is the major intestinal LCFA transporter but is also expressed at lower levels in brain, kidney, liver and heart. SLC27A4 is also expressed in skin, where it has been shown to play a major role in epidermal development, being highly expressed in neonatal keratinocytes. Defects in SLC27A4 can cause ichthyosis prematurity syndrome (IPS; MIM:604194), a keratinisation disorder which is characterised by thickened epidermis and respiratory complications. Patients suffer from a lifelong non-scaly ichthyosis (Anderson & Stahl 2013).
R-HSA-5619063	Defective SLC29A3 causes histiocytosis-lymphadenopathy plus syndrome (HLAS)	The human gene SLC29A3 encodes the equilibrative nucleoside transporter 3 (ENT3). It is abundant in many tissues, especially the placenta and is localized intracellularly on the lysosomal membrane. SLC29A3 mediates the reversible transport of nucleosides as well as anticancer and antiviral agents such as cladribine, cordycepin, tubercidin and AZT. Defects in SLC29A3 can cause histiocytosis-lymphadenopathy plus syndrome (HLAS; MIM:602782), an autosomal recessive disorder characterised by combined features from 2 or more of four histiocytic disorders (Morgan et al. 2010, Colmenero et al. 2012, Young et al. 2013).
R-HSA-5619043	Defective SLC2A1 causes GLUT1 deficiency syndrome 1 (GLUT1DS1)	Members of the SLC2A family encode glucose transporter (GLUT) proteins that mediate the facilitated diffusion of glucose between the extracellular space and the cytosol. While the monomeric protein can form a channel and transport glucose, kinetic studies suggest that the functional form of the protein is a homotetramer. SLC2A1 (GLUT1) is expressed by many cell types, notably endothelial cells, red blood cells and cells of the brain. Its low Km for glucose (~1 mM) relative to normal blood glucose concentration (~5 mM) allows these cells to take up glucose independent of changes in blood glucose levels. Defects in SLC2A1 can cause neurological disorders with wide phenotypic variability. The most severe 'classic' phenotype, GLUT1 deficiency syndrome 1 (GLUT1DS1; MIM:606777), comprises infantile-onset epileptic encephalopathy associated with delayed development, acquired microcephaly, motor incoordination and spasticity (Brockmann 2009, De Giorgis & Veggiotti 2013).
R-HSA-5619068	Defective SLC2A10 causes arterial tortuosity syndrome (ATS)	Four class III facilitative transporters can transport glucose; SLC2A6, 8, 10 and 12 (encoding GLUT6, 8, 10 and 12 respectively). SLC2A10 (located in the Type 2 diabetes-linked region of human chromosome 20q12-13.1) encodes GLUT10, a transporter with high affinity for glucose. GLUT10 is highly expressed in liver and pancreas but is present at lower levels in most tissues. Defects in SLC2A10 are the cause of arterial tortuosity syndrome (ATS), an autosomal recessive disorder of connective tissue characterised by tortuosity and elongation of major arteries, often resulting in death at a young age (Coucke et al. 2006, Callewaert et al. 2008).
R-HSA-5619098	Defective SLC2A2 causes Fanconi-Bickel syndrome (FBS)	The reversible facilitated diffusion of fructose, galactose, and glucose from the cytosol to the extracellular space is mediated by the SLC2A2 (GLUT2) transporter in the plasma membrane. In the epithelial cells of the small intestine, the basolateral localisation of SLC2A2 enables hexose sugars derived from the diet (and taken up by SLC5A1 and SLC2A5 transporters into cells) to be released into the circulation. SLC2A2 is a low affinity glucose transporter expressed mainly in the kidney, liver and pancreatic beta-cells. In beta-cells, it functions as a glucose-sensor for insulin secretion and in the liver, it allows for bi-directional glucose transport. Defects in SLC2A2 can cause Fanconi-Bickel syndrome (FBS; MIM:227810), a rare but well-defined disorder characterised by glycogen accumulation, proximal renal tubular dysfunction, and impaired utilisation of glucose and galactose (Leturque et al. 2009, Douard & Ferraris 2013).
R-HSA-5619047	Defective SLC2A9 causes hypouricemia renal 2 (RHUC2)	The human SLC2A9 gene encodes the class II facilitative glucose transporter 9 (GLUT9). SLC2A9 is expressed mainly in kidney (proximal tubules of epithelial cells) and liver. SLC2A9 is a bona fide urate transporter (uric acid), but also the uptake of fructose (Fru) and glucose (Glc) at a low rate. Uric acid is the end product of purine metabolism in humans and great apes. Defects in SLC2A9 can cause renal hypouricemia 2 (RHUC2), a common inherited disorder characterised by impaired renal urate reabsorption and resultant low serum urate levels. Some patients present with severe complications, such as exercise-induced acute kidney injury (EIAKI) and nephrolithiasis (Esparza Martin & Garcia Nieto 2011, Sebesta 2012, Shen et al. 2014).
R-HSA-5619061	Defective SLC33A1 causes spastic paraplegia 42 (SPG42)	The human gene SLC33A1 encodes acetyl-CoA transporter AT1. SLC33A1 transports cytosolic acetyl-CoA (Ac-CoA) to the Golgi apparatus lumen, where it serves as the substrate for acetyltransferases that O-acetylates sialyl residues of gangliosides and glycoproteins (Hirabayashi et al. 2013). Defects in SLC33A1 are the cause of spastic paraplegia autosomal dominant type 42 (SPG42; MIM:612539), a neurodegenerative disorder characterised by a variable speed of (but progressive) weakness and spasticity of the lower limbs (Lin et al. 2008, Hirabayashi et al. 2013). Defects in SLC33A1 can also cause congenital cataracts, hearing loss, and neurodegeneration (CCHLND; MIM:614482), an autosomal recessive disorder characterised by congenital cataracts, severe psychomotor retardation, and hearing loss, together with decreased serum ceruloplasmin and copper (Huppke et al. 2012). 
R-HSA-5619040	Defective SLC34A1 causes hypophosphatemic nephrolithiasis/osteoporosis 1 (NPHLOP1)	SLC34A1 and 2 encode Na+/Pi cotransporters, which cotransport divalent phosphate (PO4(2-), Pi) with 3 Na+ ions. SLC34A1 is an important Pi transporter mainly expressed in renal proximal tubules where it plays a major role in Pi homeostasis. Defects in SLC34A1 are the cause of hypophosphatemic nephrolithiasis/osteoporosis type 1 (NPHLOP1; MIM:612286), disease characterised by decreased renal phosphate absorption, hypophosphatemia, hyperphosphaturia, hypercalciuria, nephrolithiasis and implicated in the formation of renal calcium stones and/or bone demineralisation (Prie et al. 2002, Prie et al. 2004, Choi 2008, Boskey et al. 2013, Forster et al. 2013).
R-HSA-5619045	Defective SLC34A2 causes pulmonary alveolar microlithiasis (PALM)	SLC34A1 and 2 encode Na+/Pi cotransporters, which cotransport divalent phosphate (PO4(2-), Pi) with 3 Na+ ions. SLC34A2 is abundantly expressed in lung and to a lesser extent in tissues of epithelial origin including small intestine, pancreas, prostate, and kidney. Defects in SLC34A2 are a cause of pulmonary alveolar microlithiasis (PALM; MIM:265100), a rare disease characterised by the deposition of calcium phosphate microliths throughout the lungs. The disease follows a long-term progressive course, resulting in a slow deterioration of lung function (Corut et al. 2006, Forster et al. 2013).
R-HSA-5687583	Defective SLC34A2 causes pulmonary alveolar microlithiasis (PALM)	The human gene SLC34A2 encodes NaPi-2b which is abundantly expressed in lung and to a lesser degree in epithelia of other tissues including small intestine, pancreas, prostate, and kidney. In the lung, SLC34A2 is expressed only in alveolar type II cells, which are responsible for surfactant production, so it is proposed that it uptakes liberated phosphate from the alveolar fluid for surfactant production. SLC34A2 cotransports divalent phosphate (HPO4(2-)) with three Na+ ions (electrogenic transport) from the extracellular region into alveolar type II cells. Defects in SLC34A2 can cause pulmonary alveolar microlithiasis (PALM; MIM:265100), a rare disease characterised by the deposition of calcium phosphate microliths (tiny, roundish corpuscles) throughout the lung. Most patients remain asymptomatic for years or decades, the disease following a long-term, progressive course resulting in slow deterioration of lung functions. PALM can result in a potentially lethal disease (Yin et al. 2013, Ferreira Francisco et al. 2013, Whitsett et al. 2015).
R-HSA-5619097	Defective SLC34A3 causes Hereditary hypophosphatemic rickets with hypercalciuria (HHRH)	SLC34A3 is almost exclusively expressed at the apical membranes of kidney proximal tubules and encodes a Na+/Pi cotransporter. It cotransports 2 Na+ ions with every phosphate (Pi) (electroneutral transport). Defects in SLC34A3 are the cause of hereditary hypophosphatemic rickets with hypercalciuria (HHRH; MIM:241530), an autosomal recessive form of hypophosphatemia characterised by reduced renal phosphate reabsorption and rickets (Bergwitz et al. 2006, Segawa et al. 2013, Forster et al. 2013).
R-HSA-5619037	Defective SLC35A1 causes congenital disorder of glycosylation 2F (CDG2F)	The human gene SLC35A1 encodes the CMP-sialic acid transporter which mediates the antiport of CMP-sialic acid (CMP-Neu5Ac) into the Golgi lumen in exchange for CMP (Ishida et al. 1996). Defects in SLC35A1 are the cause of congenital disorder of glycosylation type 2F (CDG2F; MIM:603585), characterised by under-glycosylated serum proteins. CDGs are a family of severe inherited diseases caused by a defect in protein N-glycosylation. These multisystem disorders present with a wide spectrum of phenotypes such as disorders of nervous system development, psychomotor retardation, dysmorphic features, hypotonia, coagulation disorders and immunodeficiency (Martinez-Duncker et al. 2005, Song 2013).
R-HSA-5663020	Defective SLC35A1 causes congenital disorder of glycosylation 2F (CDG2F)	The human gene SLC35A1 encodes the CMP-sialic acid transporter which mediates the antiport of CMP-sialic acid (CMP-Neu5Ac) into the Golgi lumen in exchange for CMP (Ishida et al. 1996). Defects in SLC35A1 are the cause of congenital disorder of glycosylation type 2F (CDG2F; MIM:603585), characterised by under-glycosylated serum proteins. CDGs are a family of severe inherited diseases caused by a defect in protein N-glycosylation. These multisystem disorders present with a wide spectrum of phenotypes such as disorders of nervous system development, psychomotor retardation, dysmorphic features, hypotonia, coagulation disorders and immunodeficiency (Martinez-Duncker et al. 2005, Song 2013).
R-HSA-5619072	Defective SLC35A2 causes congenital disorder of glycosylation 2M (CDG2M)	The human gene SLC35A2 encodes the UDP-galactose transporter. It is located on the Golgi membrane and mediates the antiport of UDP-Gal into the Golgi lumen in exchange for UMP. Nucleotide sugars such as UDP-Gal are used in protein glycosylation in the Golgi lumen. This transporter is also known to transport UDP-N-acetylgalactosamine (UDP-GalNAc) by the same antiport mechanism. Defects in SLC35A2 limit Golgi-localised pools of UDP-Gal, resulting in truncated beta-GlcNAc-terminated N-glycans and alpha-GalNAc-terminated O-glycans. Defects in SLC35A2 can cause congenital disorder of glycosylation 2M (CDG2M; MIM:300896), a disorder characterised by developmental delay, hypotonia, ocular defects and brain malformations (Ng et al. 2013). Congenital disorders of glycosylation (CDGs) are generally characterised by under-glycosylated serum glycoproteins and a wide spectrum of clinical features. Defects in SLC35A2 can also cause early infantile epileptic encephalopathy 22 (EIEE22; MIM:300896), a severe form of epilepsy characterised by by frequent tonic seizures or spasms beginning in infancy and accompanied by developmental problems (Kodera et al. 2013). 
R-HSA-5619083	Defective SLC35A3 causes arthrogryposis, mental retardation, and seizures (AMRS)	The human gene SLC35A3 encodes a UDP-GlcNAc transporter. It is ubiquitously expressed and resides on the Golgi membrane where it transports UDP- N-acetylglucosamine (UDP-GlcNAc) into the Golgi lumen in exchange for UMP. UDP-GlcNAc is a substrate required by Golgi-resident glycosyltransferases that generate branching of N-glycosylated proteins. Defects in SLC35A3 can cause arthrogryposis, mental retardation, and seizures (AMRS; MIM:615553) (Edvardson et al. 2013). Patient cells show a large reduction of tetraantennary N-glycans with an accumulation of abnormal lower-branched glycoproteins, although the serum N-glycome was normal.
R-HSA-5619078	Defective SLC35C1 causes congenital disorder of glycosylation 2C (CDG2C)	The human gene SLC35C1 encodes the GDP-fucose transporter FUCT1. It resides on the Golgi membrane and mediates the transport of GDP-fucose into the Golgi lumen. Defects in SLC35C1 causes the congenital disorder of glycosylation type 2C (CDG2C aka leukocyte adhesion deficiency type II, LAD2), an autosomal recessive disorder characterised by moderate to severe psychomotor retardation, mild dysmorphism and impaired neutrophil motility (Lubke et al. 2001, Liu & Hirschberg 2013).
R-HSA-5579020	Defective SLC35D1 causes Schneckenbecken dysplasia (SCHBCKD)	The UDP-glucuronic acid/UDP-N-acetylgalactosamine transporter (SLC35D1) is an ER membrane-spanning protein that transports nucleotide-sugars from the cytosol into the ER lumen. SLC35D1 transports UDP-GlcUA and UDP-GalNAc, which are substrates for the synthesis of chondroitin sulfate disaccharide repeats, suggesting a role in chondroitin sulfate biosynthesis. Mutations in SLC35D1 can cause Schneckenbecken dysplasia (SCHBCKD; MIM:269250), a rare, autosomal recessive, lethal short-limbed skeletal dysplasia affecting cartilage and skeletal development (Liu et al. 2010, Liu & Hirschberg 2013).
R-HSA-5619041	Defective SLC36A2 causes iminoglycinuria (IG) and hyperglycinuria (HG)	SLC36A2 encodes proton-coupled amino acid transporter 2 (PAT2), a high-affinity cotransporter of glycine and proline coupled with the uptake of a proton in kidney and muscles (Schweikhard & Ziegler 2012). Defects in SLC36A2 can cause iminoglycinuria (IG; MIM:242600), an autosomal recessive abnormality of renal transport of glycine and the imino acids proline and hydroxyproline. Defects can also cause hyperglycinuria (HG; MIM:138500), a related disorder to IG which is characterised by excess glycine in the urine (Broer et al. 2008). Polymorphisms in the modifiers SLC6A18, 19 and 20, contribute to these phenotypes.
R-HSA-5619088	Defective SLC39A4 causes acrodermatitis enteropathica, zinc-deficiency type (AEZ)	SLC39A4 encodes the human zinc transporter hZIP4 which plays an important role in cellular zinc homeostasis. Defects in SLC39A4 result in the inherited condition acrodermatitis enteropathica, zinc deficiency type (AEZ; MIM:201100), caused by the inability to absorb dietary zinc from the duodenum and jejunum. Clinical features include growth retardation, immune system dysfunction, severe dermatitis and mental disorders (Schmitt et al. 2009).
R-HSA-5619113	Defective SLC3A1 causes cystinuria (CSNU)	Neutral and basic amino acid transport protein rBAT (SLC3A1) and b(0,+)-type amino acid transporter 1 (SLC7A9) are linked by a disulfide bridge to form system b(0,+)-like activity in the high affinity transport of neutral and dibasic amino acids and cystine. The SLC7A9:SLC3A1 heterodimer mediates the electrogenic exchange of extracellular amino acids such as L-arginine (L-Arg) and L-lysine (L-lys) and cystine (CySS-, the oxidised form of L-cysteine) for intracellular neutral amino acids such as L-leucine (L-Leu). These solute carriers are mainly expressed in the kidney and small intestine where they remove dibasic amino acids and cystine from the renal tubular and intestinal lumen respectively (Schweikhard & Ziegler 2012). Defects in SLC3A1 (or SLC7A9) can cause cystinuria (CSNU; MIM:220100), an autosomal recessive disorder characterised by impaired epithelial cell transport of cystine and dibasic amino acids in the proximal renal tubule and GI tract. The build-up and low solubility of cystine causes the formation of calculi in the urinary tract, resulting in obstructive uropathy, pyelonephritis and in severe cases, renal failure (Palacin et al. 2001, Mattoo & Goldfarb 2008, Fotiadis et al. 2013, Saravakos et al. 2014). Cystinuria is subcategorized as type A (mutations on SLC3A1) and type B (mutations on SLC7A9).
R-HSA-5655799	Defective SLC40A1 causes hemochromatosis 4 (HFE4) (duodenum)	The primary site for absorption of dietary iron is the duodenum. Ferrous iron (Fe2+) is taken up from the gut lumen across the apical membranes of enterocytes and released into the portal vein circulation across basolateral membranes. The human gene SLC40A1 encodes the metal transporter protein MTP1 (aka ferroportin or IREG1). This protein resides on the basolateral membrane of enterocytes and mediates ferrous iron efflux into the portal vein. SLC40A1 colocalises with hephaestin (HEPH) which stablises it and is necessary for the efflux reaction to occur.<br>Defects in SLC40A1 can cause hemochromatosis 4 (HFE4; MIM:606069), a disorder of iron metabolism characterised by iron overload. Excess iron is deposited in a variety of organs leading to their failure, resulting in serious illnesses including cirrhosis, hepatomas, diabetes, cardiomyopathy, arthritis and hypogonadotropic hypogonadism. Severe effects of the disease don't usually appear until after decades of progressive iron overloading (De Domenico et al. 2005, 2006, 2011, Kaplan et al. 2011).
R-HSA-5619049	Defective SLC40A1 causes hemochromatosis 4 (HFE4) (macrophages)	SLC40A1 (MTP1 aka ferroportin or IREG1) is highly expressed on macrophages where it mediates iron efflux from the breakdown of haem. SLC40A1 colocalises with ceruloplasmin (CP) which stablizes SLC40A1 and is necessary for the efflux reaction to occur. Six copper ions are required by ceruloplasmin as a cofactor.<br>Defects in SLC40A1 can cause hemochromatosis 4 (HFE4; MIM:606069), a disorder of iron metabolism characterised by iron overload. Excess iron is deposited in a variety of organs leading to their failure, resulting in serious illnesses including cirrhosis, hepatomas, diabetes, cardiomyopathy, arthritis and hypogonadotropic hypogonadism. Severe effects of the disease don't usually appear until after decades of progressive iron overloading (De Domenico et al. 2005, 2006, 2011, Kaplan et al. 2011).
R-HSA-5619050	Defective SLC4A1 causes hereditary spherocytosis type 4 (HSP4),  distal renal tubular acidosis (dRTA) and dRTA with hemolytic anemia (dRTA-HA)	The proteins responsible for the exchange of Cl- with HCO3- are members of the SLC4 (1-3) and SLC26 (3, 4, 6, 7 and 9) transporter families. SLC4A1 (Band 3, AE1, anion exchanger 1) was the first bicarbonate transporter gene to be cloned and sequenced. It is ubiquitous throughout vertebrates and in humans, is the major glycoprotein present on erythrocytes and the basolateral surfaces of kidney cells. Variations in erythroid SLC4A1 determine the Diego blood group system. Mutations in the erythrocyte form of SLC4A1 can cause hereditary spherocytosis type 4 (HSP4; MIM:612653), a disorder leading to haemolytic anaemia (HA). Some mutations in SLC4A1 can cause distal (type1) renal tubular acidosis (dRTA; MIM:179800) (an inability to acidify urine) and dRTA-HA (dRTA with hemolytic anemia) (MIM:611590) (Tanner 2002, Romero et al. 2013).<br>
R-HSA-5619054	Defective SLC4A4 causes renal tubular acidosis, proximal, with ocular abnormalities and mental retardation (pRTA-OA)	Members 4, 5, 7 and 9 of the SLC4A family couple the transport of bicarbonate (HCO3-) with sodium ions (Na+). SLC4A4 (aka NBCe1) is an electrogenic Na+/HCO3- cotransporter with a stoichiometry of 1:3. SLC4A4 is expressed in the kidney and pancreas, with lesser expression in many other tissues. Mutations in SLC4A4 can cause permanent isolated proximal renal tubular acidosis with ocular abnormalities and mental retardation (pRTA-OA), a rare autosomal recessive syndrome characterised by short stature, proximal renal tubular acidosis, mental retardation, bilateral glaucoma, cataracts and bandkeratopathy. pRTA results from the failure of the proximal tubular cells to reabsorb filtered HCO3- from urine, leading to urinary HCO3- wasting and subsequent acidemia. HCO3- also needs to move out of cells in the eye, thus failure to do so can affect ocular pressure homeostasis (Horita et al. 2005, Kurtz & Zhu 2013, Kurtz & Zhu 2013b, Seki et al. 2013).
R-HSA-5656364	Defective SLC5A1 causes congenital glucose/galactose malabsorption (GGM)	Sodium/glucose cotransporter 1 (SLC5A1 aka SGLT1) actively and reversibly transports glucose (Glc) into cells by Na+ cotransport with a Na+ to glucose coupling ratio of 2:1. SLC5A1 is mainly expressed in the microvilli of intestine and kidney and responsible for the absorption of sugars. Overexpressed SLC5A1 has been found in various cancers, possibly playing a role in preventing autophagic cell death by maintaining intracellular glucose levels. Defects in SLC5A1 can cause congenital glucose/galactose malabsorption (GGM; MIM:606824), an autosomal recessive disorder manifesting itself in newborns characterised by severe, life-threatening diarrhea which is usually fatal unless glucose and galactose are removed from the diet (Wright et al. 2002, Bergeron et al. 2008, Wright et al. 2007, Wright 2013).
R-HSA-5619091	Defective SLC5A2 causes renal glucosuria (GLYS1)	The human gene SLC5A2 encodes a sodium-dependent glucose transporter (SGLT2), expressed in many tissues but primarily in the kidney, specifically S1 and S2 proximal tubule segments. It is a low affinity, high capacity transporter of glucose across the apical membrane, with co-transport of Na+ ions in a 1:1 ratio and is the main transporter of glucose in the kidney, responsible for approximately 98% of glucose reabsorption (reaminder by SGLT1). Defects in SLC5A2 are the cause of renal glucosuria (GLYS1; MIM:233100), an autosomal recessive renal tubular disorder characterised by glucosuria in the absence of both hyperglycemia and generalized proximal tubular dysfunction. Establishing definite genotypephenotype correlations for GLYS1 is made difficult by variable expression of SLC5A2 and because other genes may have an impact on overall renal glucose resorption. Drugs that inhibit SLC5A2 are used to treat type 2 diabetes (T2D). The strategy to reduce hyperglycemia in T2D is to target renal glucose reabsorption by inhibiting SLC5A2 (Santer & Calado 2010, Calado et al. 2011).
R-HSA-5658208	Defective SLC5A2 causes renal glucosuria (GLYS1)	The human gene SLC5A2 encodes a sodium-dependent glucose transporter (SGLT2), expressed in many tissues but primarily in the kidney, specifically S1 and S2 proximal tubule segments. It is a low affinity, high capacity transporter of glucose across the apical membrane, with co-transport of Na+ ions in a 1:1 ratio and is the main transporter of glucose in the kidney, responsible for approximately 98% of glucose reabsorption (reaminder by SGLT1). Defects in SLC5A2 are the cause of renal glucosuria (GLYS1; MIM:233100), an autosomal recessive renal tubular disorder characterised by glucosuria in the absence of both hyperglycemia and generalized proximal tubular dysfunction. Establishing definite genotypephenotype correlations for GLYS1 is made difficult by variable expression of SLC5A2 and because other genes may have an impact on overall renal glucose resorption. Drugs that inhibit SLC5A2 are used to treat type 2 diabetes (T2D). The strategy to reduce hyperglycemia in T2D is to target renal glucose reabsorption by inhibiting SLC5A2 (Santer & Calado 2010, Calado et al. 2011).
R-HSA-5619096	Defective SLC5A5 causes thyroid dyshormonogenesis 1 (TDH1)	Human SLC5A5 encodes the Na+/I- symporter NIS which is localised in the basolateral membrane of thyrocytes facing the bloodstream where it mediates iodide accumulation into these cells. Defects in SLC5A5 can cause hyroid dyshormonogenesis 1 (TDH1; MIM:274400), a disorder characterised by the inability of the thyroid to maintain a concentration difference of readily exchangeable iodine between the plasma and the thyroid gland (termed iodine trapping) leading to congenital hypothyroidism (Spitzweg & Morris 2010, Grasberger & Refetoff 2011).
R-HSA-5619114	Defective SLC5A7 causes distal hereditary motor neuronopathy 7A (HMN7A)	The human SLC5A7 gene encodes a sodium- and chloride-dependent, high affinity choline transporter (CHT) transports choline (Cho) from the extracellular space into neuronal cells. Cho uptake is the rate-limiting step in acetylcholine synthesis, a neurotransmitter released at the neuromuscular junction (NMJ). Defects in SLC5A7 can cause distal hereditary motor neuronopathy 7A (HMN7A; MIM:158580). Distal hereditary motor neuronopathies are a group of neuromuscular disorders caused by selective degeneration of motor neurons in the anterior horn of the spinal cord, without sensory deficit in the posterior horn. The clinical picture consists of a progressive distal muscle wasting and weakness in the legs without clinical sensory loss (Barwick et al. 2012).
R-HSA-5658471	Defective SLC5A7 causes distal hereditary motor neuronopathy 7A (HMN7A)	The human SLC5A7 gene encodes a sodium- and chloride-dependent, high affinity choline transporter (CHT) transports choline (Cho) from the extracellular space into neuronal cells. Cho uptake is the rate-limiting step in acetylcholine synthesis, a neurotransmitter released at the neuromuscular junction (NMJ). Defects in SLC5A7 can cause distal hereditary motor neuronopathy 7A (HMN7A; MIM:158580). Distal hereditary motor neuronopathies are a group of neuromuscular disorders caused by selective degeneration of motor neurons in the anterior horn of the spinal cord, without sensory deficit in the posterior horn. The clinical picture consists of a progressive distal muscle wasting and weakness in the legs without clinical sensory loss (Barwick et al. 2012).
R-HSA-5619079	Defective SLC6A18 may confer susceptibility to iminoglycinuria and/or hyperglycinuria	SLC6A18 encodes a neutral amino acid transporter B(0)AT3 which has preference for the amino acid glycine. It is abundantly expressed in the kidney, specifically the S2/3 segments of the kidney proximal tubule (Broer & Gether 2012, Schweikhard & Ziegler 2012). Iminoglycinuria (IG; MIM:242600) or hyperglycinuria (HG; MIM:138500) can arise from defects in SLC36A2, encoding a proton-coupled amino acid transporter 2 (PAT2), a high-affinity cotransporter of glycine and proline. Mutation in SLC6A18 may contribute to both IG and HG (Broer et al. 2008).
R-HSA-5659729	Defective SLC6A18 may confer susceptibility to iminoglycinuria and/or hyperglycinuria	SLC6A18 encodes a neutral amino acid transporter B(0)AT3 which has preference for the amino acid glycine. It is abundantly expressed in the kidney, specifically the S2/3 segments of the kidney proximal tubule (Broer & Gether 2012, Schweikhard & Ziegler 2012). Iminoglycinuria (IG; MIM:242600) or hyperglycinuria (HG; MIM:138500) can arise from defects in SLC36A2, encoding a proton-coupled amino acid transporter 2 (PAT2), a high-affinity cotransporter of glycine and proline. Mutation in SLC6A18 may contribute to both IG and HG (Broer et al. 2008).
R-HSA-5619044	Defective SLC6A19 causes Hartnup disorder (HND)	SLC6A19 encodes the sodium-dependent neutral amino acid transporter B(0)AT1 and mediates the uptake of neutral amino acids across the plasma membrane accompanied by uptake of a sodium ion. The protein is abundantly expressed in the small intestine and kidney (Broer & Gether 2012, Schweikhard & Ziegler 2012). Defects in SLC6A19 can cause Hartnup disorder (HND; MIM:234500), an autosomal recessive abnormality of renal and gastrointestinal neutral amino acid transport characterised by increased urinary and intestinal excretion of neutral amino acids. Symptoms include transient manifestations of rashes, cerebellar ataxia and psychotic behaviour (Broer 2009, Cheon et al. 2010). Some mutations in SLC6A19 are thought to contribute to the phenotypes iminoglycinuria (IG; MIM:242600) and hyperglycinuria (HG; MIM:138500) (Broer et al. 2008).
R-HSA-5659735	Defective SLC6A19 causes Hartnup disorder (HND)	SLC6A19 encodes the sodium-dependent neutral amino acid transporter B(0)AT1 and mediates the uptake of neutral amino acids across the plasma membrane accompanied by uptake of a sodium ion. The protein is abundantly expressed in the small intestine and kidney (Broer & Gether 2012, Schweikhard & Ziegler 2012). Defects in SLC6A19 can cause Hartnup disorder (HND; MIM:234500), an autosomal recessive abnormality of renal and gastrointestinal neutral amino acid transport characterised by increased urinary and intestinal excretion of neutral amino acids. Symptoms include transient manifestations of rashes, cerebellar ataxia and psychotic behaviour (Broer 2009, Cheon et al. 2010). Some mutations in SLC6A19 are thought to contribute to the phenotypes iminoglycinuria (IG; MIM:242600) and hyperglycinuria (HG; MIM:138500) (Broer et al. 2008).
R-HSA-5619109	Defective SLC6A2 causes orthostatic intolerance (OI)	SLC6A2 encodes the sodium-dependent noradrenaline transporter NAT1 which terminates the action of the neurotransmitter noradrenaline by transporting it from the synapse back to its vesicles for storage and reuse (Broer & Gether 2012, Schweikhard & Ziegler 2012). SLC6A2 is expressed in the CNS and adrenal glands. Defects in SLC6A2 can cause orthostatic intolerance (OI; MIM:604715), a syndrome characterised by lightheadedness, fatigue and development of symptoms during upright standing, relieved by sitting back down again. Plasma norepinephrine concentration is abnormally high (Lambert & Lambert 2014).
R-HSA-5619081	Defective SLC6A3 causes Parkinsonism-dystonia infantile (PKDYS)	The human gene SLC6A3 encodes the sodium-dependent dopamine transporter DAT which mediates the Na-dependent re-uptake of dopamine (DA) from the synaptic cleft back into cells, thereby terminating the action of DA (Broer & Gether 2012, Schweikhard & Ziegler 2012). Defects in SLC6A3 can cause Parkinsonism-dystonia infantile (PKDYS; MIM:613135), a neurodegenerative disorder characterised by infantile onset of parkinsonism and dystonia (Kurian et al. 2011).
R-HSA-5660724	Defective SLC6A3 causes Parkinsonism-dystonia infantile (PKDYS)	The human gene SLC6A3 encodes the sodium-dependent dopamine transporter DAT which mediates the Na-dependent re-uptake of dopamine (DA) from the synaptic cleft back into cells, thereby terminating the action of DA (Broer & Gether 2012, Schweikhard & Ziegler 2012). Defects in SLC6A3 can cause Parkinsonism-dystonia infantile (PKDYS; MIM:613135), a neurodegenerative disorder characterised by infantile onset of parkinsonism and dystonia (Kurian et al. 2011).
R-HSA-5619089	Defective SLC6A5 causes hyperekplexia 3 (HKPX3)	The amino acid glycine (Gly) plays an important role in neurotransmission. Its action is terminated by rapid re-uptake into the pre-synaptic terminal or surrounding glial cells. This re-uptake is mediated by the sodium- and chloride-dependent glycine transporters 1 and 2 (GLYT1 and GLYT2 respectively) (Broer & Gether 2012, Schweikhard & Ziegler 2012). GLYT2 is encoded by the human gene SLC6A5 and is predominantly expressed in the medulla. Defects in SLC6A5 cause startle disease (STHE or hyperekplexia (HKPX3; MIM:614618)), a neurologic disorder characterised by neonatal hypertonia, an exaggerated startle response to tactile or acoustic stimuli, and life-threatening neonatal apnea. Sometimes symptoms resolve in the first year of life (Bode & Lynch 2014, James et al. 2012).
R-HSA-5660862	Defective SLC7A7 causes lysinuric protein intolerance (LPI)	SLC7A7 encodes the y+L amino acid transporter 1 (y+LAT1). As a heterodimer with SLC3A2 in the plasma membrane, SLC7A7 mediates the exchange of arginine (L-Arg) for leucine (L-Leu) and a sodium ion (Na+). The physiological concentrations of arginine and leucine are expected to favor arginine export (Schweikhard & Ziegler 2012). Defects in SLC7A7 can cause Lysinuric protein intolerance (LPI; MIM:222700), a metabolic disorder characterised by decreased cationic amino acid (CAA) transport at the basolateral membrane of epithelial cells in the intestine and kidney, increased renal excretion of CAA and orotic aciduria. There is extreme variability clinically but typical symptoms include refusal to feed, vomiting and consequent failure to thrive. Hepatosplenomegaly, hematological anomalies and neurological involvement are recurrent clinical features (Sperandeo et al. 2008, Sebastio et al. 2011).<br>
R-HSA-5660883	Defective SLC7A9 causes cystinuria (CSNU)	SLC7A9 encodes the b(0,+)-type amino acid transporter 1 BAT1. As a heterodimer with SLC3A1 in the plasma membrane, SLC7A9 mediates the high-affinity, sodium-independent transport of cystine (CySS-, the oxidised form of L-cysteine) and dibasic amino acids in exchange for neutral amino acids and is thought to be responsible for the reabsorption of CySS- and dibasic amino acids in the kidney tubule (Schweikhard & Ziegler 2012). Defects in SLC7A9 (or SLC3A1) can cause cystinuria (CSNU; MIM:220100), an autosomal disorder characterised by impaired renal reabsorption of cystine and dibasic amino acids. The low solubility of cystine causes the formation of calculi in the urinary tract resulting in obstructive uropathy, pyelonephritis, and, rarely, renal failure (Palacin et al. 2001, Mattoo & Goldfarb 2008, Fotiadis et al. 2013, Saravakos et al. 2014, Barbosa et al. 2012). Cystinuria is subcategorised as type A (mutations on SLC3A1) and type B (mutations on SLC7A9).
R-HSA-5619092	Defective SLC9A6 causes  X-linked, syndromic mental retardation,, Christianson type (MRXSCH)	SLC9A6 encodes the sodium/hydrogen exchanger 6 NHE6, a protein ubiquitously expressed but most abundant in mitochondria-rich tissues such as brain, skeletal muscle and heart. It is located on endosomal membranes and thought to play a housekeeping role in pH homeostasis in early endosomes. It mediates the electroneutral exchange of protons for Na+ and K+ across the early and recycling endosome membranes. Defects in SLC9A6 can cause mental retardation, X-linked, syndromic, Christianson type (MRXSCH; MIM:300243), a syndrome characterised by profound mental retardation, epilepsy, ataxia and microcephaly. MRXSCH shows phenotypic overlap with Angelman syndrome (Gilfillan et al. 2008, Schroer et al. 2010, Kondapalli et al. 2014).
R-HSA-5619052	Defective SLC9A9 causes autism 16 (AUTS16)	SLC9A9 encodes the sodium/hydrogen exchanger 9 NHE9 which is expressed ubiquitously and thought to play a housekeeping role in pH homeostasis in the late endosome membrane. A defect in SLC9A9 can contribute to susceptibility to autism 16 (AUTS16; MIM:613410). Autism, the prototypic pervasive developmental disorder (PDD), is a complex, multifactorial disorder characterised by reciprocal social interaction and communication impairment, restricted and stereotyped patterns of interests and activities, and the presence of developmental abnormalities by age 3 (Morrow et al. 2008, Kondapalli et al. 2014).
R-HSA-5619110	Defective SLCO1B1 causes hyperbilirubinemia, Rotor type (HBLRR)	The bile acids glycocholate (GCCA) or taurocholate (TCCA) can be transported into the cytosol by SLCO1B1, which encodes the solute carrier organic anion transporter family member 1B1 (OAT1B1 aka OATP2, OATPC, SLC21A6). GCCA and TCCA exist in the blood as complexes with serum albumin (ALB), and its uptake by SLCO1B1 must involve disruption of this complex, but the molecular mechanism coupling disruption and uptake is unknown. In the body, SLCO1B1 is expressed on the basolateral surfaces of hepatocytes and may play a role in the uptake of GCCA and TCCA by the liver under physiological conditions. Defects in SLCO1B1 can cause hyperbilirubinemia, Rotor type (HBLRR; MIM:237450), an autosomal recessive form of primary conjugated hyperbilirubinemia. Mild jaundice, not associated with hemolysis, develops shortly after birth or in childhood (van de Steeg et al. 2012, Sticova & Jirsa 2013, Keppler 2014).
R-HSA-5661182	Defective SLCO1B1 causes hyperbilirubinemia, Rotor type (HBLRR)	Three organic anion transporting polypeptides (OATPs; now called solute carrier organic anion transporters, SLCOs) are able to mediate the transport of thryoid hormones, predominantly thyroxine (T4) and triiodothyronine (T3). SLCO1B1 encodes the solute carrier organic anion transporter family member 1B1 (OATP1B1, formerly OATPC), which can also transport bile salts, is mainly expressed in the liver. Defects in SLCO1B1 can cause hyperbilirubinemia, Rotor type (HBLRR; MIM:237450), an autosomal recessive form of primary conjugated hyperbilirubinemia. Mild jaundice, not associated with hemolysis, develops shortly after birth or in childhood (van de Steeg et al. 2012, Sticova & Jirsa 2013, Keppler 2014).
R-HSA-5619058	Defective SLCO1B3 causes hyperbilirubinemia, Rotor type (HBLRR)	The bile acids glycocholate (GCCA) or taurocholate (TCCA) can be transported into the cytosol by SLCO1B3, which encodes the solute carrier organic anion transporter family member 1B3 (OATP1B3 aka OATP8, SLC21A8). GCCA and TCCA exist in the blood as complexes with serum albumin (ALB), and its uptake by SLCO1B1 must involve disruption of this complex, but the molecular mechanism coupling disruption and uptake is unknown. In the body, SLCO1B1 is expressed on the basolateral surfaces of hepatocytes and may play a role in the uptake of GCCA and TCCA by the liver under physiological conditions. Defects in SLCO1B3 can cause hyperbilirubinemia, Rotor type (HBLRR; MIM:237450), an autosomal recessive form of primary conjugated hyperbilirubinemia. Mild jaundice, not associated with hemolysis, develops shortly after birth or in childhood (van de Steeg et al. 2012, Sticova & Jirsa 2013, Keppler 2014).
R-HSA-5619095	Defective SLCO2A1 causes primary, autosomal recessive hypertrophic osteoarthropathy 2 (PHOAR2)	The human gene SLCO2A1 encodes prostaglandin transporter PGT. It is ubiquitously expressed and can transport the protaglandins PGD2, PGE1, PGE2 and PGF2A. This transport may be important for release of newly-formed prostaglandins (PGs) and/or their clearance of prostaglandins from the circulation. Defects in SLCO2A1 can cause hypertrophic osteoarthropathy, primary, autosomal recessive, 2 (PHOAR2; MIM:614441), a rare genodermatosis characterised by pachydermia, digital clubbing, periostosis and affecting more males than females (Castori et al. 2005, Seifert et al. 2012, Diggle et al. 2012, Madruga Dias et al. 2014).
R-HSA-4755579	Defective SRD5A3 causes SRD5A3-CDG (CDG-1q) and KHRZ	Polyprenol reductase (SRD5A3), resident on the endoplasmic reticulum membrane, normally mediates the reduction of the alpha-isoprene unit of polyprenol (pPNOL) to form dolichol (DCHOL) in a NADPH-dependent manner (Cantagrel et al. 2010). DCHOLs are substrates required for the synthesis of the lipid-linked oligosaccharide (LLO) precursor used for N-glycosylation. Defects in SRD5A3 cause congenital disorder of glycosylation 1q (SRD5A3-CDG, CDG1q; MIM:612379), a neurodevelopmental disorder characterised by under-glycosylated serum glycoproteins resulting in nervous system development, psychomotor retardation, hypotonia, coagulation disorders and immunodeficiency (Cantagrel et al. 2010, Kasapkara et al. 2012). Defects in SRD5A3 can also cause Kahrizi syndrome (KHRZ; MIM:612713), a neurodevelopmental disorder characterised by mental retardation, cataracts, holes in eye structures, pathological curvature of the spine, and coarse facial features (Kahrizi et al. 2011).
R-HSA-3656243	Defective ST3GAL3 causes MCT12 and EIEE15	CMP-N-acetylneuraminate-beta-1,4-galactoside alpha-2,3-sialyltransferase (ST3GAL3) mediates the transfer of sialic acid from CMP-sialic acid to galactose-containing glycoproteins and forms the sialyl Lewis a epitope on proteins which are required for attaining and/or maintaining higher cognitive functions. Some defects in ST3GAL3 result in mental retardation, autosomal recessive 12 (MRT12; MIM:611090), a disorder characterised by below average general intellectual function and impaired adaptive behaviour (Najmabadi et al. 2007, Hu et al. 2011). Another defect of ST3GAL3 can cause early infantile epileptic encephalopathy-15 (EIEE15: MIM:615006), resulting in severe mental retardation (Edvardson et al. 2012).
R-HSA-5579032	Defective TBXAS1 causes Ghosal hematodiaphyseal dysplasia (GHDD)	Thromboxane-A synthase (TBXAS1), an enzyme of the arachidonic acid cascade, produces thromboxane A2 (TXA2) from prostaglandin H2 (PGH2). Together with prostacyclin (PGI2), TXA2 plays a key role in the maintenance of haemostasis. It is also a constrictor of vascular and respiratory smooth muscle and implicated in the induction of osteoclast differentiation and activation. Defects in TBXAS1 can cause Ghosal hematodiaphyseal dysplasia (GHDD; MIM:231095), a rare autosomal recessive disorder characterised by increased bone density with predominant diaphyseal involvement and aregenerative anemia, a bone marrow failure where functional marrow cells are regenerated slowly or not at all (Genevieve et al. 2008).
R-HSA-3359454	Defective TCN2 causes hereditary megaloblastic anemia	Defective transcobalamin II (produced by the TCN2 gene) results in TCN2 deficiency (MIM:275350), an autosomal recessive disorder with early-onset in infancy characterized by failure to thrive, megaloblastic anemia, and pancytopenia. If left untreated, the disorder can result in mental retardation and neurologic abnormalities (Haberle et al. 2009).
R-HSA-5578995	Defective TPMT causes Thiopurine S-methyltransferase deficiency (TPMT deficiency)	Methylation is a major biotransformation route of thiopurine drugs such as 6-mercaptopurine (6MP), used in the treatment of inflammatory diseases such as rheumatoid arthritis and childhood acute lymphoblastic leukemia. 6MP and its thioguanine nucleotide metabolites are principally inactivated by thiopurine methyltransferase (TPMT)-catalysed S-methylation.<br><br>Defects in TPMT can cause thiopurine S-methyltransferase deficiency (TPMT deficiency; MIM:610460). Patients with intermediate or no TPMT activity are at risk of toxicity such as myelosuppression after receiving standard doses of thiopurine drugs. Inter individual differences in response to these drugs are largely determined by genetic variation at the TPMT locus. TPMT exhibits an autosomal co dominant phenotype: About one in 300 people in Caucasian, African, African-American, and Asian populations are TPMT deficient. Approximately 6-10% of people in these populations inherit intermediate TPMT activity and are heterozygous at the TPMT locus. The rest are homozygous for the wild type allele and have high levels of TPMT activity. (Remy 1963, Weinshilboum et al. 1999, Couldhard & Hogarth 2005, Al Hadithy et al. 2005, Azimi et al. 2014).
R-HSA-5619107	Defective TRP may confer susceptibility towards thyroid papillary carcinoma (TPC)	The nuclear pore complex (NPC) trafficks cargo across the nuclear membrane. Nucleoprotein TRP functions as a scaffolding element in the nuclear phase of the NPC essential for normal nucleocytoplasmic transport of proteins and mRNAs. The complex glucokinase (GCK1) and glucokinase regulatory protein (GKRP) can be translocated to the nucleus via the NPC. Defects in TRP may confer susceptibility towards thyroid papillary carcinona (TPC; MIM:18850), a common tumor of the thyroid that typically arises as an irregular, solid or cystic mass from otherwise normal thyroid tissue (Vriens et al. 2009, Bonora et al. 2010).
R-HSA-5579002	Defective UGT1A1 causes hyperbilirubinemia	UDP-glucuronosyltransferases (UGTs) play a major role in the conjugation and therefore elimination of potentially toxic xenobiotics and endogenous compounds. The 1-1 isoform UGT1A1 is able to act upon lipophilic bilirubin, the end product of heme breakdown. Defects in UGT1A1 can cause hyperbilirubinemia syndromes ranging from mild forms such as Gilbert syndrome (GILBS; MIM:143500) and transient familial neonatal hyperbilirubinemia (HBLRTFN; MIM:237900) to the more severe Crigler-Najjar syndromes 1 and 2 (CN1, CN2; MIM:218800 and MIM:606785) (Sticova & Jirsa 2013, Strassburg 2010, Udomuksorn et al. 2007, Costa 2006, Maruo et al. 2000).
R-HSA-5579016	Defective UGT1A4 causes hyperbilirubinemia	UDP-glucuronosyltransferases (UGTs) play a major role in the conjugation and therefore elimination of potentially toxic xenobiotics and endogenous compounds. The 1-4 isoform UGT1A4 is able to act upon lipophilic bilirubin, the end product of heme breakdown. Defects in UGT1A4 can cause hyperbilirubinemia syndromes ranging from mild forms such as Gilbert syndrome (GILBS; MIM:143500) to the more severe Crigler-Najjar syndromes 1 and 2 (CN1, CN2; MIM:218800 and MIM:606785) (Sticova & Jirsa 2013, Strassburg 2010, Udomuksorn et al. 2007, Costa 2006, Maruo et al. 2000).
R-HSA-3323169	Defects in biotin (Btn) metabolism	Biotin (Btn, vitamin B7, vitamin H, coenzyme R) is an essential cofactor for five biotin-dependent carboxylase enzymes, involved in the synthesis of fatty acids, isoleucine, valine and in gluconeogenesis. Thus, Btn is necessary for cell growth, fatty acid synthesis and the metabolism of fats and amino acids. Inherited metabolic disorders characterized by deficient activities of all five biotin dependent carboxylases are termed multiple carboxylase deficiencies. Two congenital defects in biotin metabolism leading to multiple carboxylase deficiency are known, holocarboxylase synthetase deficiency (MIM 609018) and biotinidase deficiency (MIM 253260). In both scenarios symptoms include ketolactic acidosis, organic aciduria, hyperammonemia, skin rashes, hypotonia, seizures, developmental delay, alopecia, and coma. As humans are auxotrophic for Btn, the micronutrient must be obtained from external soures such as intestinal microflora and dietary forms. Accordingly, severe malnutrition can also give rise to biotin deficiency and multiple carboxylase deficiency. Biotin deficiency can also be induced by the excessive consumption of raw egg white that contains the biotin-binding protein avidin. Holocarboxylase synthetase deficiency arises when all five biotin-dependent enzymes are not biotinylated leading to their reduced activities. The defective genes causing these conditions are described here (Pendini et al. 2008, Suzuki et al. 2005). Biotinidase deficiency is caused by defects in the recycling of Btn. General symptoms include decreased appetite and growth, dermatitis and perosis. The defective genes causing these conditions are described here (Procter et al. 2013).<br>
R-HSA-3296469	Defects in cobalamin (B12) metabolism	Cobalamin (Cbl, vitamin B12) is a nutrient essential for normal functioning of the brain and nervous system and for the formation of blood. Cbl-dependent methionine synthase (MTR) is required for conversion of 5-methyltetrahydrofolate (metTHF) to tetrahydrofolate (THF), in addition to its role in conversion of homocysteine to methionine. In Cbl deficiency, and in inborn errors of Cbl metabolism that affect function of methionine synthase, inability to regenerate THF from metTHF results in decreased function of folate-dependent reactions that are involved in 2 steps of purine biosynthesis and thymidylate synthesis. Cbl deficiency results in hyperhomocysteinemia (due to defects in the conversion of homocysteine to methionine which requires Cbl as a cofactor) and increased levels of methylmalonic acid (MMA). Methionine is used in myelin production, protein, neurotransmitter, fatty acid and phospholipid production and DNA methylation. Symptoms of Cbl deficiency are bone marrow promegaloblastosis (megaloblastic anemia) due to the inhibition of DNA synthesis (specifically purines and thymidine) and neurological symptoms. The defective genes involved in Cbl deficiencies are described below (Froese & Gravel 2010, Nielsen et al. 2012, Whitehead 2006, Watkins & Rosenblatt 2011, Fowler 1998).
R-HSA-3296482	Defects in vitamin and cofactor metabolism	Vitamins are essential nutrients, required in small amounts from the diet for the normal growth and development of a multicellular organism. Where there is vitamin deficiency, either by poor diet or a defect in metabolic conversion, diseases called Avitaminoses occur. Currently, cobalamin (Cbl, vitamin B12) metabolic defects are described below (Chapter 155 in The Metabolic and Molecular Bases of Inherited Disease, 8th ed, Scriver et al. 2001)
R-HSA-1461973	Defensins	The defensins are a family of antimicrobial cationic peptide molecules which in mammals have a characteristic beta-sheet-rich fold and framework of six disulphide-linked cysteines (Selsted & Ouellette 2005, Ganz 2003). Human defensin peptides have two subfamilies, alpha- and beta-defensins, differing in the length of peptide chain between the six cysteines and the order of disulphide bond pairing between them. A third subfamily, the theta defensins, is derived from alpha-defensins prematurely truncated by a stop codon between the third and fourth cysteine residues. The translated products are shortened to nonapeptides, covalently dimerized by disulfide linkages, and cyclized via new peptide bonds between the first and ninth residues. Humans have one pseudogene but no translated representatives of the theta class.<br>In solution most alpha and beta defensins are monomers but can form dimers and higher order structures. The primary cellular sources of defensins are neutrophils, epithelial cells and intestinal Paneth cells.Those expressed in neutrophils and the gut are predominantly constitutive, while those in epithelial tissues such as skin are often inducible by proinflammatory stimuli such as LPS or TNF-alpha. Defensins are translated as precursor polypeptides that include a typical signal peptide or prepiece that is cleaved in the Golgi body, and a propiece, cleaved by differing mechanisms to produce the mature defensin. Mature defensin peptides can be further processed by removal of individual N-terminal residues (Yang et al. 2004). This may be a mechanism to broaden the activity profile of defensins (Ghosh et al. 2002). Defensins have direct antimicrobial effects and kill a wide range of Gram-positive and negative bacteria, fungi and some viruses. The primary antimicrobial action of defensins is permeabilization of microbial target membranes but several additional mechanisms have been suggested (Brogden 2005, Wilmes et al. 2011). Defensins and related antimicrobial peptides such as cathelicidin bridge the innate and acquired immune responses. In addition to their antimicrobial properties, cathelicidin and several defensins show receptor-mediated chemotactic activity for immune cells such as monocytes, T cells or immature DCs, induce cytokine production by monocytes and epithelial cells, modulate angiogenesis and stimulate wound healing (Yang et al. 1999, 2000, 2004, Rehaume & Hancock 2008, Yeung et al. 2011).
R-HSA-4641257	Degradation of AXIN	AXIN is present in low concentrations in the cell and is considered to be the limiting component of the beta-catenin destruction complex in Xenopus; this may not be the case in mammalian cells, however (Lee et al, 2003; Tan et al, 2012). Cellular levels of AXIN are regulated in part through ubiquitin-mediated turnover. E3 ligases SMURF2 and RNF146 have both been shown to play a role in promoting the degradation of AXIN by the 26S proteasome (Kim and Jho, 2010; Callow et al, 2011; Zhang et al, 2011).
R-HSA-195253	Degradation of beta-catenin by the destruction complex	The beta-catenin destruction complex plays a key role in the canonical Wnt signaling pathway. In the absence of Wnt signaling, this complex controls the levels of cytoplamic beta-catenin. Beta-catenin associates with and is phosphorylated by the destruction complex. Phosphorylated beta-catenin is recognized and ubiquitinated by the SCF-beta TrCP ubiquitin ligase complex and is subsequently degraded by the proteasome (reviewed in Kimelman and Xu, 2006).
R-HSA-1614558	Degradation of cysteine and homocysteine	While in humans excess methionine is converted to homocysteine, homocysteine and its transsulfuration product cysteine can be degraded to several end products, two of which, taurine and hydrogen sulfide, have uses in other biological processes (Stipanuk & Ueki 2011).
R-HSA-4641258	Degradation of DVL	DVL protein levels are regulated by both proteasomal and lysosomal degradation (reviewed in Gao and Chen, 2010). The E3 ligases HECF1, ITCH and KLHL12:CUL3 have all been shown to contribute to the polyubiquitination and subsequent degradation of DVL (Angers et al, 2006; Miyazaki et al, 2004; Wei et al, 2012). DVL stability is also regulated by its interaction with DACT1, which promotes degradation of DVL in the lysosome (Cheyette et al, 2002; Zhang et al, 2006).
R-HSA-916853	Degradation of GABA	GABA is metabolized to succinated by the serial action of two enzymes, 4-aminobutyrate aminotransferase and suucinate semialdehyde dehydrogenase.
R-HSA-5610780	Degradation of GLI1 by the proteasome	GLI1 is the most divergent of the 3 mammalian GLI transcription factors and lacks a transcriptional repressor domain. Although GLI1 is dispensible for development, the gene is an early transcriptional target of Hh signaling and the protein contributes a minor activation function in mammals (Dai et al, 1999; Bai et al, 2002; Park et al, 2000).<br>In the absence of Hh signaling, GLI1 is completely degraded by the proteasome, in contrast to the partial processing that occurs with GLI3. This differential response reflects the absence in GLI1 of two of the three elements identified in GLI3 that promote partial proteolysis; these are the zinc finger region, present in all GLI proteins, and an adjacent linker sequence and the degron, neither of which are found in the GLI1 protein (Schrader et al, 2011; Pan and Wang, 2007).
R-HSA-5610783	Degradation of GLI2 by the proteasome	The primary role of the GLI2 protein is as an activator of Hh-dependent signaling upon pathway stimulation; in the absence of Hh ligand, a small fraction of GLI2 appears to be processed to a repressor form, but the bulk of the protein is completely degraded by the proteasome (reviewed in Briscoe and Therond, 2013). Both the processing and the degradation of GLI2 is dependent upon sequential phosphorylation of multiple serine residues by PKA, CK1 and GSK3, analagous to the requirement for these kinases in the processing of GLI3 (Pan et al, 2009; Pan et al, 2006; Pan and Wang, 2007). The differential processing of GLI2 and GLI3 depends on the processing determinant domain (PDD) in the C-terminal of the proteins, which directs the partial proteolysis of GLI3 in the absence of Hh signal. Substitution of 2 amino-acids from GLI3 into the GLI2 protein is sufficient to promote efficient processing of GLI2 to the repressor form (Pan and Wang, 2007).
R-HSA-1474228	Degradation of the extracellular matrix	Matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs), previously referred to as matrixins because of their role in degradation of the extracellular matrix (ECM), are zinc and calcium dependent proteases belonging to the metzincin family. They contain a characteristic zinc-binding motif HEXXHXXGXXH (Stocker & Bode 1995) and a conserved Methionine which forms a Met-turn. Humans have 24 MMP genes giving rise to 23 MMP proteins, as MMP23 is encoded by two identical genes. All MMPs contain an N-terminal secretory signal peptide and a prodomain with a conserved PRCGXPD motif that in the inactive enzyme is localized with the catalytic site, the cysteine acting as a fourth unpaired ligand for the catalytic zinc atom. Activation involves delocalization of the domain containing this cysteine by a conformational change or proteolytic cleavage, a mechanism referred to as the cysteine-switch (Van Wart & Birkedal-Hansen 1990). Most MMPs are secreted but the membrane type MT-MMPs are membrane anchored and some MMPs may act on intracellular proteins. Various domains determine substrate specificity, cell localization and activation (Hadler-Olsen et al. 2011). MMPs are regulated by transcription, cellular location (most are not activated until secreted), activating proteinases that can be other MMPs, and by metalloproteinase inhibitors such as the tissue inhibitors of metalloproteinases (TIMPs). MMPs are best known for their role in the degradation and removal of ECM molecules. In addition, cleavage of the ECM and other cell surface molecules can release ECM-bound growth factors, and a number of non-ECM proteins are substrates of MMPs (Nagase et al. 2006). MMPs can be divided into subgroups based on domain structure and substrate specificity but it is clear that these are somewhat artificial, many MMPs belong to more than one functional group (Vise & Nagase 2003, Somerville et al. 2003).
R-HSA-5467343	Deletions in the AMER1 gene destabilize the destruction complex	Genomic deletions of the entire AMER1/WTX gene occur in about 12% of Wilms tumors, a pediatric kidney cancer. Nonsense and missense mutations have also been identified (Ruteshouser et al, 2008; Wegert et al, 2009). AMER1 is a known component of the destruction complex and interacts directly with beta-catenin through the C-terminal half (Major et al, 2007). siRNA depletion of AMER1 in mammalian cells stabilizes cellular beta-catenin levels and increases the expression of a beta-catenin-dependent reporter gene, suggesting that AMER1 is a tumor suppressor gene (Major et al, 2007; reviewed in Huff, 2011).
R-HSA-5467345	Deletions in the AXIN genes in hepatocellular carcinoma result in elevated WNT signaling	Deletions in the AXIN1 gene have been identified in 2 hepatocellular carcinoma cell lines. These deletions, which remove the N-terminal exons of the gene, compromise AXIN1 expression and result in elevated expression of a TCF-dependent reporter (Satoh et al, 2000, reviewed in Salahshor and Woodgett, 2005).
R-HSA-112308	Depolarization of the Presynaptic Terminal Triggers the Opening of Calcium Channels	The action potential travels down the axon and reaches the pre-synaptic terminal depolarizing the membrane in the pre-synaptic terminal. The depolarization causes the voltage-gated Ca2+ channels to open allowing the influx of Ca2+ that signals the release of neurotransmitter into the synaptic cleft.
R-HSA-4419969	Depolymerisation of the Nuclear Lamina	The nuclear envelope breakdown in mitotic prophase involves depolymerisation of lamin filaments, the main constituents of the nuclear lamina. The nuclear lamina is located at the nuclear face of the inner nuclear membrane and plays and important role in the structure and function of the nuclear envelope (reviewed by Burke and Stewart 2012). Depolymerisation of lamin filaments, which consist of lamin homodimers associated through electrostatic interactions in head-to-tail molecular strings, is triggered by phosphorylation of lamins. While CDK1 phosphorylates the N-termini of lamins (Heald and McKeon 1990, Peter et al. 1990, Ward and Kirschner 1990, Mall et al. 2012), PKCs (PRKCA and PRKCB) phosphorylate the C-termini of lamins (Hocevar et al. 1993, Goss et al. 1994, Mall et al. 2012). PKCs are activated by lipid-mediated signaling, where lipins, activated by CTDNEP1:CNEP1R1 serine/threonine protein phosphatase complex, catalyze the formation of DAG (Gorjanacz et al. 2009, Golden et al. 2009, Wu et al. 2011, Han et al. 2012, Mall et al. 2012).
R-HSA-606279	Deposition of new CENPA-containing nucleosomes at the centromere	Eukaryotic centromeres are marked by a unique form of histone H3, designated CENPA in humans. In human cells newly synthesized CENPA is deposited in nucleosomes at the centromere during late telophase/early G1 phase of the cell cycle. Once deposited, nucleosomes containing CENPA remain stably associated with the centromere and are partitioned equally to daughter centromeres during S phase. A current model proposes that pre-existing CENPA at the centromere drives recruitment of new CENPA, however this has not been proved.<br>The deposition process requires at least 3 complexes: the Mis18 complex, HJURP complex, and the RSF complex. HJURP binds newly synthesized CENPA-H4 tetramers before deposition and brings them to the centromere for deposition in new CENPA-containing nucleosomes. The exact mechanism of deposition remains unknown.
R-HSA-73927	Depurination	Depurination of a damaged nucleotide is mediated by a purine-specific DNA glycosylase. The glycosylase cleaves the N-C1' glycosidic bond between the damaged DNA base and the deoxyribose sugar, generating a free base and an abasic i.e. apurinic/apyrimidinic (AP) site (Slupphaug et al. 1996, Parikh et al. 1998).
R-HSA-73928	Depyrimidination	Depyrimidination of a damaged nucleotide in DNA is mediated by a pyrimidine-specific DNA glycosylase. The glycosylase cleaves the N-C1' glycosidic bond between the damaged DNA base and the deoxyribose sugar generating a free base and an abasic i.e. apurinic/apyrimidinic (AP) site (Lindahl and Wood 1999).
R-HSA-2022923	Dermatan sulfate biosynthesis	Dermatan sulfate (DS) consists of N-acetylgalactosamine (GalNAc) residues alternating in glycosidic linkages with glucuronic acid (GlcA) or iduronic acid (IdoA) residues. As with CS, GalNAc residues can be sulfated in CS chains but also the uronic acid <br>residues may be substituted with sulfate at the 2- and 4- positions. The steps below outline the synthesis of a simple DS chain (Silbert & Sugumaran 2002).
R-HSA-3299685	Detoxification of Reactive Oxygen Species	Reactive oxygen species such as superoxide (O2.-), peroxides (ROOR), singlet oxygen, peroxynitrite (ONOO-), and hydroxyl radical (OH.) are generated by cellular processes such as respiration (reviewed in Murphy 2009, Brand 2010) and redox enzymes and are required for signaling yet they are damaging due to their high reactivity (reviewed in Imlay 2008, Buettner 2011, Kavdia 2011, Birben et al. 2012, Ray et al. 2012). Aerobic cells have defenses that detoxify reactive oxygen species by converting them to less reactive products. Superoxide dismutases convert superoxide to hydrogen peroxide and oxygen (reviewed in Fukai and Ushio-Fukai 2011). Catalase and peroxidases then convert hydrogen peroxide to water.<br>Humans contain 3 superoxide dismutases: SOD1 is located in the cytosol and mitochondrial intermembrane space, SOD2 is located in the mitochondrial matrix, and SOD3 is located in the extracellular region. Superoxide, a negative ion, is unable to easily cross membranes and tends to remain in the compartment where it was produced. Hydrogen peroxide, one of the products of superoxide dismutase, is able to diffuse across membranes and pass through aquaporin channels. In most cells the primary source of hydrogen peroxide is mitochondria and, once in the cytosol, hydrogen peroxide serves as a signaling molecule to regulate redox-sensitive proteins such as transcription factors, kinases, phosphatases, ion channels, and others (reviewed in Veal and Day 2011, Ray et al. 2012). Hydrogen peroxide is decomposed to water by catalase, decomposed to water plus oxidized thioredoxin by peroxiredoxins, and decomposed to water plus oxidized glutathione by glutathione peroxidases (Presnell et al. 2013).
R-HSA-1266738	Developmental Biology	As a first step towards capturing the array of processes by which a fertilized egg gives rise to the diverse tissues of the body, examples of three kinds of processes have been annotated. These are aspects of the roles of <b>cell adhesion molecules</b> in axonal guidance and myogenesis, of <b>transcriptional regulation</b> in hematopoiesis (specifically, B lymphopoiesis), pancreatic beta cell and white adipocyte differentiation, and molecular events of <b>"nodal" signaling</b>.
R-HSA-3134963	DEx/H-box helicases activate type I IFN and inflammatory cytokines production 	DHX36 and DHX9 are aspartate-glutamate-any amino acid aspartate/histidine (DExD/H) box helicase (DHX) proteins that localize in the cytosol. The DHX RNA helicases family includes a large number of proteins that are implicated in RNA metabolism. Members of this family, RIG-1 and MDA5, have been shown to sense a non-self RNA leading to type I IFN production. RNA helicases DHX36 and DHX9 were found to trigger host responses to non-self DNA in MyD88-dependent manner. DHX36 sensed CpG class A, while DHX9 sensed CpG class B. Both DHX36 and DHX9 were critical for antiviral immune responses in viral DNA-stimulated human plasmacytoid dendritic cells (pDC) (Kim T et al. 2010).
R-HSA-189085	Digestion of dietary carbohydrate	Carbohydrate is a major component of the human diet, and includes starch (amylose and amylopectin) and disaccharides such as sucrose, lactose, maltose and, in small amounts, trehalose. The digestion of starch begins with the action of amylase enzymes secreted in the saliva and small intestine, which convert it to maltotriose, maltose, limit dextrins, and some glucose. Digestion of the limit dextrins and disaccharides, both dietary and starch-derived, to monosaccharides - glucose, galactose, and fructose - is accomplished by enzymes located on the luminal surfaces of enterocytes lining the microvilli of the small intestine (Van Beers et al. 1995).
R-HSA-192456	Digestion of dietary lipid	Dietary lipids such as long-chain triacylglycerols and cholesterol esters are digested in the stomach and small intestine to yield long-chain fatty acids, monoacylglycerols, glycerol and cholesterol through the action of a variety of lipases, and are then absorbed into enterocytes.
R-HSA-69416	Dimerization of procaspase-8	Procaspase-8 monomers undergo dimerization. The dimerization event occurs at death-inducing signaling complex (DISC) and results in a reposition of the procaspase-8 inter-subunit linker to become accessible for intermolecular processing by the associated procaspase-8 molecule [Keller N et al 2010; Oberst A et al 2010].
R-HSA-4641262	Disassembly of the destruction complex and recruitment of AXIN to the membrane	Upon stimulation with WNT ligand, AXIN and GSK3beta are recruited to the plasma membrane through interaction with DVL (Tamai et al, 2004; Mao et al, 2001; reviewed in He et al, 2004). Polymerization of membrane-associated DVL and GSK3beta- and CSNK1-mediated phosphorylation of LRP5/6 establish a feed-forward mechanism for enhanced membrane recruitment of AXIN upon WNT signaling (Tamai et al, 2004; Cong et al, 2004; Zeng et al, 2005; Bilic et al, 2007). In Xenopus oocytes, but not necessarily all sytems, AXIN is present in limiting concentrations and is considered rate limiting for the assembly of the destruction complex (Lee et al, 2003; Benchabane et al, 2008; Tan et al, 2012; reviewed in MacDonald et al, 2009). The recruitment of AXIN away from the destruction complex upon WNT stimulation effectively destabilizes the destruction complex and contributes to the accumulation of free beta-catenin (Kikuchi, 1999; Lee et al, 2003). AXIN association with the destruction complex is also regulated by phosphorylation. In the active destruction complex, AXIN is phosphorylated by GSK3beta; dephosphorylation by protein phosphatase 1 (PP1) or protein phosphatase 2A (PP2A) destabilizes the interaction of AXIN with the other components of the destruction complex and promotes its disassembly (Luo et al, 2007; Willert et al, 1999; Jho et al, 1999). Free AXIN is also subject to degradation by the 26S proteasome in a manner that depends on the poly-ADP-ribosylating enzymes tankyrase 1 and 2 (Huang et al, 2009). <br>
R-HSA-1643685	Disease	Biological processes are captured in Reactome by identifying the molecules (DNA, RNA, protein, small molecules) involved in them and describing the details of their interactions. From this molecular viewpoint, human disease pathways have three mechanistic causes: the inclusion of microbially-expressed proteins, altered functions of human proteins, or changed expression levels of otherwise functionally normal human proteins.<p>The first group encompasses the infectious diseases such as influenza, tuberculosis and HIV infection. The second group involves human proteins modified either by a mutation or by an abnormal post-translational event that produces an aberrant protein with a novel function. Examples include somatic mutations of EGFR and FGFR (epidermal and fibroblast growth factor receptor) genes, which encode constitutively active receptors that signal even in the absence of their ligands, or the somatic mutation of IDH1 (isocitrate dehydrogenase 1) that leads to an enzyme active on 2-oxoglutarate rather than isocitrate, or the abnormal protein aggregations of amyloidosis which lead to diseases such as Alzheimer's.<p>Infectious diseases are represented in Reactome as microbial-human protein interactions and the consequent events. The existence of variant proteins and their association with disease-specific biological processes is represented by inclusion of the modified protein in a new or variant reaction, an extension to the 'normal' pathway. Diseases which result from proteins performing their normal functions but at abnormal rates can also be captured, though less directly. Many mutant alleles encode proteins that retain their normal functions but have abnormal stabilities or catalytic efficiencies, leading to normal reactions that proceed to abnormal extents. The phenotypes of such diseases can be revealed when pathway annotations are combined with expression or rate data from other sources.
R-HSA-3560782	Diseases associated with glycosaminoglycan metabolism	A number of genetic disorders are caused by mutations in the genes encoding glycosyltransferases and sulfotransferases, enzymes responsible for the synthesis of glycosaminoglycans (GAGs) as well as hexosaminidase degradation of GAGs (Mizumoto et al. 2013).
R-HSA-5609975	Diseases associated with glycosylation precursor biosynthesis	Glycosylation diseases associated with the enzymes that mediate the biosynthesis of glycosylation precursors are curated in this section (Jaeken & Matthijs 2007, Freeze et al. 2015).
R-HSA-3781860	Diseases associated with N-glycosylation of proteins	Congenital disorders of glycosylation (CDGs) are a group of autosomal recessive disorders caused by enzymatic defects in the synthesis and processing of asparagine (N)-linked glycans or oligosaccharides on glycoproteins. These glycoconjugates play critical roles in processes such as metabolism, cell recognition and adhesion, cell migration, protease resistance, host defense, and antigenicity. CDGs are divided into 2 main groups: type I CDGs comprise defects in the assembly of the dolichol lipid-linked oligosaccharide (LLO) chain and its transfer to the nascent protein, whereas type II CDGs comprise defects in the trimming and processing of protein-bound glycans (Marquardt & Denecke 2003, Grunewald et al. 2002, Hennet 2012, Cylwik et al. 2013).
R-HSA-5687613	Diseases associated with surfactant metabolism	The reactions annotated here describe genetic defects in genes regulating surfactant homeostasis which are associated with severe acute and chronic lung diseases in newborns and older infants (Whitsett et al. 2015).
R-HSA-5602358	Diseases associated with the TLR signaling cascade	Toll like receptors (TLRs) are sensors of the innate immune system that detect danger signals derived from pathogens (pathogen-associated molecular patterns - PAMP) or damaged cells (damage-associated molecular patterns - DAMP) (Pasare C and Medzhitov R 2005; Barton GM and Kagan JC 2009; Kawai T and Akira S 2010). Signaling by these sensors promotes the activation and nuclear translocation of transcription factors (IRFs, NFkB and AP1). The transcription factors induce secretion of inflammatory cytokines such as IL-6, TNF and pro-IL1beta that direct the adaptive immune response. Inherited or acquired abnormalities in TLR-mediated processes may lead to increased susceptibility to infection, excessive inflammation, autoimmunity and malignancy (Picard C et al. 2010; Netea MG et al. 2012; Varettoni M et al. 2013). Here we describe four primary immunodeficiency (PID) disorders associated with defective TLR-mediated responses. First, MyD88 or IRAK4 deficiency is characterized with a greater susceptibility to pyogenic bacteria in affected patients (Picard C et al. 2003; von Bernuth H et al. 2008). Second, defects in the TLR3 signaling pathway are associated with a greater susceptibility to herpes simplex virus encephalitis (Zhang SY et al. 2013). Third, imunodeficiencies due to defects in NFkB signaling components are linked to impaired TLR-mediated responses (Courtois G et al. 2003; Fusco F et al. 2004). Finally, events are annotated showing constitutive activation of a somatically mutated MyD88 gene which results in malignancy (Varettoni M et al. 2013).
R-HSA-2474795	Diseases associated with visual transduction	The process of vision involves two stages; the retinoid cycle which supplies and regenerates the visual chromophore required for vision and phototransduction which propagates the light signal. Defects in the genes involved in the retinoid cycle cause degenerative retinal diseases. These defective genes are described here (for reviews see Travis et al. 2007, Palczewski 2010, Fletcher et al. 2011, den Hollander et al. 2008).
R-HSA-5663084	Diseases of carbohydrate metabolism	The processes by which dietary carbohydrate is digested to monosaccharides and these are taken up from the gut lumen into cells where they are oxidized to yield energy or consumed in biosynthetic processes are a central part of human metabolism and defects in them can lead to serious disease. Defects annotated here affect saccharide digestion in the gut lumen, fructose metabolism, and the pentose phosphate pathway. In addition, the defect in glucuronate catabolism that leads to essential pentosuria, a benign phenotype that is one of Garrod's original four inborn errors of metabolism, is annotated.
R-HSA-3781865	Diseases of glycosylation	Diseases of glycosylation, usually referred to as congenital disorders of glycosylation (CDG), are rare inherited disorders ascribing defects of nucleotide-sugar biosynthesis and transport, glycosyltransfer events and vesicular transport. Most CDGs cause neurological impairment ranging from severe psychomotor retardation to mild intellectual disability. Defects in N-glycosylation are the main cause of CDGs (Marquardt & Denecke 2003, Grunewald et al. 2002, Hennet 2012, Goreta et al. 2012) and can be identified by a characteristic abnormal isoelectric focusing profile of plasma transferrin (Jaeken et al. 1984, Stibler & Jaeken 1990). Disorders of O-glycosylation, glycosaminoglycan and glycolipid metabolism have recently been discovered and, together with N-glycosylation, represent the major pathways affected by glycan biosynthetic disorders (Freeze 2006, Jaeken 2011). As the number of these disorders has increased, nomenclature has been simplified so that now, the name of the mutant gene is followed by the abbreviation CDG (Jaeken et al. 2009). Effective therapies for most types of CDGs are so far not available (Thiel & Korner 2013).
R-HSA-5260271	Diseases of Immune System	The immune system is a complex network of the biological processes that provide defense mechanisms during infection or in response to an intrinsic danger signal. Compromised immune response may present itself as either overactivity or underactivity of the immune system leading to a broad spectrum of clinical phenotypes that can be categorized into four main groups - autoimmunity, immunodeficiency (ID) with a greater susceptibility to infectious diseases, hypersensitivity to compounds that are usually not harmful and malignancy. Several host conditions may cause the dysfunctional immunity. Among them are inherited and somatic mutations found in the components of immune signaling pathways. In addition to genetic defects, infection with pathogen such as human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), or interaction of immune cells with immunosuppressive drugs result in non-genetic immunodeficiencies. Age-associated alterations in immunity may also contribute to pathogenesis of immunodeficiency .<p>The Reactome module represents selected defects of the immune system and provides a short description of their clinical phenotypes. The module also describes functional features of defective molecules by both providing a published source for experimental functional analysis data and linking to the corresponding normal process within the Reactome database.
R-HSA-5668914	Diseases of metabolism	Metabolic processes in human cells generate energy through the oxidation of molecules consumed in the diet and mediate the synthesis of diverse essential molecules not taken in the diet as well as the inactivation and elimination of toxic ones generated endogenously or present in the extracellular environment. Mutations that disrupt these processes by inactivating a required enzyme or regulatory protein, or more rarely by changing its specificity can lead to severe diseases. Ones annotated here involve aspects of carbohydrate, amino acid, and vitamin metabolism, and biological oxidations. One somatic mutation that affects cytosolic isocitrate metabolism, often found in glioblastomas and some lymphoid neoplasms, is also annotated.
R-HSA-5663202	Diseases of signal transduction	Signaling processes are central to human physiology (e.g., Pires-da Silva & Sommer 2003), and their disruption by either germ-line and somatic mutation can lead to serious disease. Here, the molecular consequences of mutations affecting visual signal transduction and signaling by diverse growth factors are annotated.
R-HSA-5619115	Disorders of transmembrane transporters	Proteins with transporting functions can be roughly classified into 3 categories: ATP hydrolysis-coupled pumps, ion channels, and transporters. Pumps utilize the energy released by ATP hydrolysis to power the movement of substrates across the membrane against their electrochemical gradient. Channels in their open state can transfer substrates (ions or water) down their electrochemical gradient at an extremely high efficiency (up to 108 s-1). Transporters facilitate the movement of a specific substrate either against or with their concentration gradient at a lower speed (about 102 -104 s-1); as generally believed, conformational change of the transporter protein is involved in the transfer process. Diseases caused by defects in these transporter proteins are detailed in this section. Currently, disorders associated with ABC transporters are annotated here (Dean 2005).
R-HSA-110357	Displacement of DNA glycosylase by APEX1	Following cleavage of the damaged base, DNA glycosylase is displaced by APEX1, an AP endonuclease (Parikh et al. 1998).
R-HSA-75205	Dissolution of Fibrin Clot	The crosslinked fibrin multimers in a clot are broken down to soluble polypeptides by plasmin, a serine protease. Plasmin can be generated from its inactive precursor plasminogen and recruited to the site of a fibrin clot in two ways, by interaction with tissue plasminogen activator at the surface of a fibrin clot, and by interaction with urokinase plasminogen activator at a cell surface. The first mechanism appears to be the major one responsible for the dissolution of clots within blood vessels. The second, although capable of mediating clot dissolution, may normally play a major role in tissue remodeling, cell migration, and inflammation (Chapman 1997; Lijnen 2001). These other functions of urokinase plasminogen activator will be annotated in future versions of Reactome.<br>Clot dissolution is regulated in two ways. First, efficient plasmin activation and fibrinolysis occur only in complexes formed at the clot surface or on a cell membrane - proteins free in the blood are inefficient catalysts and are rapidly inactivated. Second, both plasminogen activators and plasmin itself are inactivated by specific serpins, proteins that bind to serine proteases to form stable, enzymatically inactive complexes (Kohler and Grant 2000).<br>These events are outlined in the drawing: black arrows connect the substrates (inputs) and products (outputs) of individual reactions, and blue lines connect output activated enzymes to the other reactions that they catalyze.
R-HSA-73893	DNA Damage Bypass	In addition to various processes for removing lesions from the DNA, cells have developed specific mechanisms for tolerating unrepaired damage during the replication of the genome. These mechanisms are collectively called DNA damage bypass pathways. The Y family of DNA polymerases plays a key role in DNA damage bypass. <p>Y family DNA polymerases, REV1, POLH (DNA polymerase eta), POLK (DNA polymerase kappa) and POLI (DNA polymerase iota), as well as the DNA polymerase zeta (POLZ) complex composed of REV3L and MAD2L2, are able to carry out translesion DNA synthesis (TLS) or replicative bypass of damaged bases opposite to template lesions that arrest high fidelity, highly processive replicative DNA polymerase complexes delta (POLD) and epsilon (POLE). REV1, POLH, POLK, POLI and POLZ lack 3'->5' exonuclease activity and exhibit low fidelity and weak processivity. The best established TLS mechanisms are annotated here. TLS details that require substantial experimental clarification have been omitted. For recent and past reviews of this topic, please refer to Lehmann 2000, Friedberg et al. 2001, Zhu and Zhang 2003, Takata and Wood 2009, Ulrich 2011, Saugar et al. 2014.
R-HSA-5696394	DNA Damage Recognition in GG-NER	In global genome nucleotide excision repair (GG-NER), the DNA damage is recognized by two protein complexes. The first complex consists of XPC, RAD23A or RAD23B, and CETN2. This complex probes the DNA helix and recognizes damage that disrupts normal Watson-Crick base pairing, which results in binding of the XPC:RAD23:CETN2 complex to the undamaged DNA strand. The second complex is a ubiquitin ligase UV-DDB that consists of DDB2, DDB1, CUL4A or CUL4B and RBX1. The UV-DDB complex is necessary for the recognition of UV-induced DNA damage and may contribute to the retention of the XPC:RAD23:CETN2 complex at the DNA damage site. The UV-DDB complex binds the damaged DNA strand (Fitch et al. 2003, Wang et al. 2004, Moser et al. 2005, Camenisch et al. 2009, Oh et al. 2011).
R-HSA-73942	DNA Damage Reversal	DNA damage can be directly reversed by dealkylation (Mitra and Kaina 1993). Three enzymes play a major role in reparative DNA dealkylation: MGMT, ALKBH2 and ALKBH3. MGMT dealkylates O-6-methylguanine in a suicidal reaction that inactivates the enzyme (Daniels et al. 2000, Rasimas et al. 2004, Duguid et al. 2005, Tubbs et al. 2007), while ALKBH2 and ALKBH3 dealkylate 1-methyladenine, 3-methyladenine, 3-methylcytosine and 1-ethyladenine (Duncan et al. 2002, Dango et al. 2011).
R-HSA-2559586	DNA Damage/Telomere Stress Induced Senescence	Reactive oxygen species (ROS), whose concentration increases in senescent cells due to oncogenic RAS-induced mitochondrial dysfunction (Moiseeva et al. 2009) or due to environmental stress, cause DNA damage in the form of double strand breaks (DSBs) (Yu and Anderson 1997). In addition, persistent cell division fueled by oncogenic signaling leads to replicative exhaustion, manifested in critically short telomeres (Harley et al. 1990, Hastie et al. 1990). Shortened telomeres are no longer able to bind the protective shelterin complex (Smogorzewska et al. 2000, de Lange 2005) and are recognized as damaged DNA. <p>The evolutionarily conserved MRN complex, consisting of MRE11A (MRE11), RAD50 and NBN (NBS1) subunits, binds DSBs (Lee and Paull 2005) and shortened telomeres that are no longer protected by shelterin (Wu et al. 2007). Once bound to the DNA, the MRN complex recruits and activates ATM kinase (Lee and Paull 2005, Wu et al. 2007), leading to phosphorylation of ATM targets, including TP53 (p53) (Banin et al. 1998, Canman et al. 1998, Khanna et al. 1998). TP53, phosphorylated on serine S15 by ATM, binds the CDKN1A (also known as p21, CIP1 or WAF1) promoter and induces CDKN1A transcription (El-Deiry et al. 1993, Karlseder et al. 1999). CDKN1A inhibits the activity of CDK2, leading to G1/S cell cycle arrest (Harper et al. 1993, El-Deiry et al. 1993).<p>SMURF2 is upregulated in response to telomere attrition in human fibroblasts and induces senecscent phenotype through RB1 and TP53, independently of its role in TGF-beta-1 signaling (Zhang and Cohen 2004). The exact mechanism of SMURF2 involvement is senescence has not been elucidated. 
R-HSA-5693606	DNA Double Strand Break Response	DNA double strand break (DSB) response involves sensing of DNA DSBs by the MRN complex which triggers ATM activation. ATM phosphorylates a number of proteins involved in DNA damage checkpoint signaling, as well as proteins directly involved in the repair of DNA DSBs. For a recent review, please refer to Ciccia and Elledge, 2010.
R-HSA-5693532	DNA Double-Strand Break Repair	Numerous types of DNA damage can occur within a cell due to the endogenous production of oxygen free radicals, normal alkylation reactions, or exposure to exogenous radiations and chemicals. Double-strand breaks (DSBs), one of the most dangerous type of DNA damage along with interstrand crosslinks, are caused by ionizing radiation or certain chemicals such as bleomycin, and occur normally during the processes of DNA replication, meiotic exchange, and V(D)J recombination.<p>The two most prominent mechanisms for DSB repair are the error-free homologous recombination repair (HRR) pathway and the error-prone nonhomologous end-joining (NHEJ) pathway. The choice of the repair pathway may be determined by whether the DNA region has already replicated and the precise nature of the break. NHEJ functions at all stages of the cell cycle, but plays the predominant role in both the G1 phase and in S-phase regions of DNA that have not yet replicated (Rothkamm et al. 2003). HRR functions primarily in repairing both one-sided DSBs that arise at DNA replication forks and two-sided DSBs arising in S or G2-phase chromatid regions that have replicated. For a recent review, please refer to Ciccia and Elledge 2010. 
R-HSA-5334118	DNA methylation	Methylation of cytosine is catalyzed by a family of DNA methyltransferases (DNMTs): DNMT1, DNMT3A, and DNMT3B transfer methyl groups from S-adenosylmethionine to cytosine, producing 5-methylcytosine and homocysteine (reviewed in Klose and Bird 2006, Ooi et al. 2009, Jurkowska et al. 2011, Moore et al. 2013). (DNMT2 appears to methylate RNA rather than DNA.) DNMT1, the first enzyme discovered, preferentially methylates hemimethylated CG motifs that are produced by replication (template strand methylated, synthesized strand unmethylated). Thus it maintains existing methylation through cell division. DNMT3A and DNMT3B catalyze de novo methylation at unmethylated sites that include both CG dinucleotides and non-CG motifs.<br>DNA from adult humans contains about 0.76 to 1.00 mole percent 5-methylcytosine (Ehrlich et al. 1982, reviewed in Klose and Bird 2006, Ooi et al. 2009, Moore et al. 2013). Methylation of DNA occurs at cytosines that are mainly located in CG dinucleotides. CG dinucleotides are unevenly distributed in the genome. Promoter regions tend to have a high CG-content, forming so-called CG-islands (CGIs), while the CG-content in the remaining part of the genome is much lower. CGIs tend to be unmethylated, while the majority of CGs outside CGIs are methylated. Methylation in promoters and first exons tends to repress transcription while methylation in gene bodies (regions of genes downstream of the promoter and first exon) correlates with transcription (reviewed in Ehrlich and Lacey 2013, Kulis et al. 2013). Proteins such as MeCP2 and MBDs specifically bind 5-methylcytosine and may recruit other factors.<br>Mammalian development has two major episodes of genome-wide demethylation and remethylation (reviewed in Zhou 2012, Guibert and Weber 2013, Hackett and Surani 2013, Dean 2014). In mice about 1 day after fertilization the paternal genome is actively demethylated by TET proteins together with thymine DNA glycosylase and the maternal genome is demethylated by passive dilution during replication, however methylation at imprinted sites is maintained. The genome has its lowest methylation level about 3.5 days post-fertilization. Remethylation occurs by 6.5 days post-fertilization. The second demethylation-remethylation event occurs in primordial germ cells of the developing embryo about 12.5 days post-fertilization. DNMT3A and DNMT3B, together with the non-catalytic DNMT3L, play major roles in the remethylation events (reviewed in Chen and Chan 2014). How the methyltransferases are directed to particular regions of the genome remains an area of active research. The mechanisms at each locus may differ in detail but a connection between histone modifications and DNA methylation has been observed (reviewed in Rose and Klose 2014).
R-HSA-73894	DNA Repair	DNA repair is a phenomenal multi-enzyme, multi-pathway system required to ensure the integrity of the cellular genome. Living organisms are constantly exposed to harmful metabolic by-products, environmental chemicals and radiation that damage their DNA, thus corrupting genetic information. In addition, normal cellular pH and temperature create conditions that are hostile to the integrity of DNA and its nucleotide components. DNA damage can also arise as a consequence of spontaneous errors during DNA replication. The DNA repair machinery continuously scans the genome and maintains genome integrity by removing or mending any detected damage.<p>Depending on the type of DNA damage and the cell cycle status, the DNA repair machinery utilizes several different pathways to restore the genome to its original state. When the damage and circumstances are such that the DNA cannot be repaired with absolute fidelity, the DNA repair machinery attempts to minimize the harm and patch the insulted genome well enough to ensure cell viability.<p>Accumulation of DNA alterations that are the result of cumulative DNA damage and utilization of "last resort" low fidelity DNA repair mechanisms is associated with cellular senescence, aging, and cancer. In addition, germline mutations in DNA repair genes are the underlying cause of many familial cancer syndromes, such as Fanconi anemia, xeroderma pigmentosum, Nijmegen breakage syndrome and Lynch syndrome, to name a few.<p> When the level of DNA damage exceeds the capacity of the DNA repair machinery, apoptotic cell death ensues. Actively dividing cells have a very limited time available for DNA repair and are therefore particularly sensitive to DNA damaging agents. This is the main rationale for using DNA damaging chemotherapeutic drugs to kill rapidly replicating cancer cells.<p>There are seven main pathways employed in human DNA repair: DNA damage bypass, DNA damage reversal, base excision repair, nucleotide excision repair, mismatch repair, repair of double strand breaks and repair of interstrand crosslinks (Fanconi anemia pathway). DNA repair pathways are intimately associated with other cellular processes such as DNA replication, DNA recombination, cell cycle checkpoint arrest and apoptosis.<p>The DNA damage bypass pathway does not remove the damage, but instead allows translesion DNA synthesis (TLS) using a damaged template strand. Translesion synthesis allows cells to complete DNA replication, postponing the repair until cell division is finished. DNA polymerases that participate in translesion synthesis are error-prone, frequently introducing base substitutions and/or small insertions and deletions.<p>The DNA damage reversal pathway acts on a very narrow spectrum of damaging base modifications to remove modifying groups and restore DNA bases to their original state.<p>The base excision repair (BER) pathway involves a number of DNA glycosylases that cleave a vast array of damaged bases from the DNA sugar-phosphate backbone. DNA glycosylases produce a DNA strand with an abasic site. The abasic site is processed by DNA endonucleases, DNA polymerases and DNA ligases, the choice of which depends on the cell cycle stage, the identity of the participating DNA glycosylase and the presence of any additional damage. Base excision repair yields error-free DNA molecules.<p>Mismatch repair (MMR) proteins recognize mismatched base pairs or small insertion or deletion loops during DNA replication and correct erroneous base pairing by excising mismatched nucleotides exclusively from the nascent DNA strand, leaving the template strand intact.<p>Nucleotide excision repair pathway is involved in removal of bulky lesions that cause distortion of the DNA double helix. NER proteins excise the oligonucleotide that contains the lesion from the affected DNA strand, which is followed by gap-filling DNA synthesis and ligation of the repaired DNA molecule. <p>Double strand breaks (DSBs) in the DNA can be repaired via a highly accurate homologous recombination repair (HRR) pathway, or through error-prone nonhomologous end joining (NHEJ), single strand annealing (SSA) and microhomology-mediated end joining (MMEJ) pathways. DSBs can be directly generated by some DNA damaging agents, such as X-rays and reactive oxygen species (ROS). DSBs can also be intermediates of the Fanconi anemia pathway.<p>Interstrand crosslinking (ICL) agents damage the DNA by introducing covalent bonds between two DNA strands, which disables progression of the replication fork. The Fanconi anemia proteins repair the ICLs by unhooking them from one DNA strand. TLS enables the replication fork to bypass the unhooked ICL, resulting in two replicated DNA molecules, one of which contains a DSB and triggers double strand break repair, while the sister DNA molecule contains a bulky unhooked ICL, which is removed through NER.<p>Single strand breaks (SSBs) in the DNA, generated either by DNA damaging agents or as intermediates of DNA repair pathways such as BER, are converted into DSBs if the repair is not complete prior to DNA replication. Simultaneous inhibition of DSB repair and BER through cancer mutations and anti-cancer drugs, respectively, is synthetic lethal in at least some cancer settings, and is a promising new therapeutic strategy.<p>For reviews of DNA repair pathways, please refer to Lindahl and Wood 1999 and Curtin 2012.<br>
R-HSA-69306	DNA Replication	Studies in the past decade have suggested that the basic mechanism of DNA replication initiation is conserved in all kingdoms of life. Initiation in unicellular eukaryotes, in particular Saccharomyces cerevisiae (budding yeast), is well understood, and has served as a model for studies of DNA replication initiation in multicellular eukaryotes, including humans. In general terms, the first step of initiation is the binding of the replication initiator to the origin of replication. The replicative helicase is then assembled onto the origin, usually by a helicase assembly factor. Either shortly before or shortly after helicase assembly, some local unwinding of the origin of replication occurs in a region rich in adenine and thymine bases (often termed a DNA unwinding element, DUE). The unwound region provides the substrate for primer synthesis and initiation of DNA replication. The best-defined eukaryotic origins are those of S. cerevisiae, which have well-conserved sequence elements for initiator binding, DNA unwinding and binding of accessory proteins. In multicellular eukaryotes, unlike S. cerevisiae, these loci appear not to be defined by the presence of a DNA sequence motif. Indeed, choice of replication origins in a multicellular eukaryote may vary with developmental stage and tissue type. In cell-free models of metazoan DNA replication, such as the one provided by Xenopus egg extracts, there are only limited DNA sequence specificity requirements for replication initiation (Kelly & Brown 2000; Bell & Dutta 2002; Marahrens & Stillman 1992; Cimbora & Groudine 2001; Mahbubani et al 1992, Hyrien & Mechali 1993).
R-HSA-68952	DNA replication initiation	DNA polymerases are not capable of de novo DNA synthesis and require synthesis of a primer, usually by a DNA-dependent RNA polymerase (primase) to begin DNA synthesis. In eukaryotic cells, the primer is synthesized by DNA polymerase alpha:primase. First, the DNA primase portion of this complex synthesizes approximately 6-10 nucleotides of RNA primer and then the DNA polymerase portion synthesizes an additional 20 nucleotides of DNA (Frick & Richardson 2002; Wang et al 1984).
R-HSA-69002	DNA Replication Pre-Initiation	Although, DNA replication occurs in the S phase of the cell cycle, the formation of the DNA replication pre-initiation complex begins during G1 phase.
R-HSA-69190	DNA strand elongation	Accurate and efficient genome duplication requires coordinated processes to replicate two template strands at eucaryotic replication forks. Knowledge of the fundamental reactions involved in replication fork progression is derived largely from biochemical studies of the replication of simian virus and from yeast genetic studies. Since duplex DNA forms an anti-parallel structure, and DNA polymerases are unidirectional, one of the new strands is synthesized continuously in the direction of fork movement. This strand is designated as the leading strand. The other strand grows in the direction away from fork movement, and is called the lagging strand. Several specific interactions among the various proteins involved in DNA replication underlie the mechanism of DNA synthesis, on both the leading and lagging strands, at a DNA replication fork. These interactions allow the replication enzymes to cooperate in the replication process (Hurwitz et al 1990; Brush et al 1996; Ayyagari et al 1995; Budd & Campbell 1997; Bambara et al 1997).
R-HSA-379401	Dopamine clearance from the synaptic cleft	The human gene SLC6A3 encodes the sodium-dependent dopamine transporter, DAT which mediates the re-uptake of dopamine from the synaptic cleft (Vandenbergh DJ et al, 2000). Dopamine can then be degraded by either COMT or monoamine oxidase.
R-HSA-212676	Dopamine Neurotransmitter Release Cycle	Dopamine neurotransmitter cycle occurs in dopaminergic neurons. Dopamine is synthesized and loaded into the clathrin sculpted monoamine transport vesicles. The vesicles are docked, primed and fused with the plasmamembrane in the synapse to release dopamine into the synaptic cleft.
R-HSA-390651	Dopamine receptors	Dopamine receptors play vital roles in processes such as the control of learning, motivation, fine motor control and modulation of neuroendocrine signaling (Giralt JA and Greengard P, 2004). Abnormalities in dopamine receptor signaling may lead to neuropsychiatric disorders such as Parkinson's disease and schizophrenia. Dopamine receptors are prominent in the CNS and the neurotransmitter dopamine is the primary endogenous ligand for these receptors. In humans, there are five distinct types of dopamine receptor, D1-D5. They are subdivided into two families; D1-like family (D1 and D5) which couple with the G protein alpha-s and are excitatory and D2-like family (D2,D3 and D4) which couple with the G protein alpha-i and are inhibitory (Kebabian JW and Calne DB, 1979).
R-HSA-1358803	Downregulation of ERBB2:ERBB3 signaling	Level of plasma membrane ERBB3 is regulated by E3 ubiquitin ligase RNF41 (also known as NRDP1), which binds and ubiquitinates both inactive and activated ERBB3, targeting it for degradation (Cao et al. 2007). RNF41 is subject to self-ubiquitination which keeps its levels low when ERBB3 is not stimulated, and preserves ERBB3 expression on the cell surface (Qiu et al. 2002). Self-ubiquitination of RNF41 is reversible, through the action of ubiquitin protease USP8, an enzyme stabilized by AKT-mediated phosphorylation. Therefore, activation of AKT by ERBB2:ERBB3 signaling leads to phosphorylation of USP8 (Cao et al. 2007), which increases level of RNF41 through deubiquitination, and results in degradation of activated ERBB3 (Cao et al. 2007) - a negative feedback loop of ERBB3 signaling. Downregulation of EGFR and ERBB4 signaling is explained in pathways Signaling by EGFR and Signaling by ERBB4.
R-HSA-1253288	Downregulation of ERBB4 signaling	WW-domain binding motifs in the C-tail of ERBB4 play an important role in the downregulation of ERBB4 receptor signaling, enabling the interaction of intact ERBB4, ERBB4 m80 and ERBB4 s80 with NEDD4 family of E3 ubiquitin ligases WWP1 and ITCH. The interaction of WWP1 and ITCH with intact ERBB4 is independent of receptor activation and autophosphorylation. Binding of WWP1 and ITCH ubiquitin ligases leads to ubiquitination of ERBB4 and its cleavage products, and subsequent degradation through both proteasomal and lysosomal routes (Omerovic et al. 2007, Feng et al. 2009). In addition, the s80 cleavage product of ERBB4 JM-A CYT-1 isoform is the target of NEDD4 ubiquitin ligase. NEDD4 binds ERBB4 JM-A CYT-1 s80 (ERBB4jmAcyt1s80) through its PIK3R1 interaction site and mediates ERBB4jmAcyt1s80 ubiquitination, thereby decreasing the amount of ERBB4jmAcyt1s80 that reaches the nucleus (Zeng et al. 2009).
R-HSA-2173795	Downregulation of SMAD2/3:SMAD4 transcriptional activity	Transcriptional activity of SMAD2/3:SMAD4 heterotrimer can be inhibited by formation of a complex with SKI or SKIL (SNO), where SKI or SKIL recruit NCOR and possibly other transcriptional repressors to SMAD-binding promoter elements (Sun et al. 1999, Luo et al. 1999, Strochein et al. 1999). Higher levels of phosphorylated SMAD2 and SMAD3, however, may target SKI and SKIL for degradation (Strochein et al. 1999, Sun et al. 1999 PNAS, Bonni et al. 2001) through recruitment of SMURF2 (Bonni et al. 2001) or RNF111 i.e. Arkadia (Levy et al. 2007) ubiquitin ligases to SKI/SKIL by SMAD2/3. Therefore,the ratio of SMAD2/3 and SKI/SKIL determines the outcome: inhibition of SMAD2/3:SMAD4-mediated transcription or degradation of SKI/SKIL. SKI and SKIL are overexpressed in various cancer types and their oncogenic effect is connected with their ability to inhibit signaling by TGF-beta receptor complex. <br>SMAD4 can be monoubiquitinated by a nuclear ubiquitin ligase TRIM33 (Ecto, Ectodermin, Tif1-gamma). Monoubiquitination of SMAD4 disrupts SMAD2/3:SMAD4 heterotrimers and leads to SMAD4 translocation to the cytosol. In the cytosol, SMAD4 can be deubiquitinated by USP9X (FAM), reversing TRIM33-mediated negative regulation (Dupont et al. 2009).<br>Phosphorylation of the linker region of SMAD2 and SMAD3 by CDK8 or CDK9 primes SMAD2/3:SMAD4 complex for ubiquitination by NEDD4L and SMURF ubiquitin ligases. NEDD4L ubiquitinates SMAD2/3 and targets SMAD2/3:SMAD4 heterotrimer for degradation (Gao et al. 2009). SMURF2 monoubiquitinates SMAD2/3, leading to disruption of SMAD2/3:SMAD4 complexes (Tang et al. 2011). <br>Transcriptional repressors TGIF1 and TGIF2 bind SMAD2/3:SMAD4 complexes and inhibit SMAD-mediated transcription by recruitment of histone deacetylase HDAC1 to SMAD-binding promoter elements (Wotton et al. 1999, Melhuish et al. 2001).<br>PARP1 can attach poly ADP-ribosyl chains to SMAD3 and SMAD4 within SMAD2/3:SMAD4 heterotrimers. PARylated SMAD2/3:SMAD4 complexes are unable to bind SMAD-binding DNA elements (SBEs) (Lonn et al. 2010). <br>Phosphorylated SMAD2 and SMAD3 can be dephosphorylated by PPM1A protein phosphatase, leading to dissociation of SMAD2/3 complexes and translocation of unphosphorylated SMAD2/3 to the cytosol (Lin et al. 2006). 
R-HSA-2173788	Downregulation of TGF-beta receptor signaling	TGF-beta receptor signaling is downregulated by proteasome and lysosome-mediated degradation of ubiquitinated TGFBR1, SMAD2 and SMAD3, as well as by dephosphorylation of TGFBR1, SMAD2 and SMAD3. <br><br>In the nucleus, SMAD2/3:SMAD4 complex stimulates transcription of SMAD7, an inhibitory SMAD (I-SMAD). SMAD7 binds phosphorylated TGFBR1 and competes with the binding of SMAD2 and SMAD3 (Hayashi et al. 1997, Nakao et al. 1997). Binding of SMAD7 to TGBR1 can be stabilized by STRAP, a protein that simultaneously binds SMAD7 and TGFBR1 (Datta et al. 2000). BAMBI simultaneously binds SMAD7 and activated TGFBR1, leading to downregulation of TGF-beta receptor complex signaling (Onichtchouk et al. 1999, Yan et al. 2009).<br> <br>In addition to competing with SMAD2/3 binding to TGFBR1, SMAD7 recruits protein phosphatase PP1 to phosphorylated TGFBR1, by binding to the PP1 regulatory subunit PPP1R15A (GADD34). PP1 dephosphorylates TGFBR1, preventing the activation of SMAD2/3 and propagation of TGF-beta signal (Shi et al. 2004). <br> <br>SMAD7 associates with several ubiquitin ligases, SMURF1 (Ebisawa et al. 2001, Suzuki et al. 2002, Tajima et al. 2003, Chong et al. 2010), SMURF2 (Kavsak et al. 2000, Ogunjimi et al. 2005), and NEDD4L (Kuratomi et al. 2005), and recruits them to phosphorylated TGFBR1 within TGFBR complex. SMURF1, SMURF2 and NEDD4L ubiquitinate TGFBR1 (and SMAD7), targeting TGFBR complex for proteasome and lysosome-dependent degradation (Ebisawa et al. 2001, Kavsak et al. 2000, Kuratomi et al. 2005). The ubiquitination of TGFBR1 can be reversed by deubiquitinating enzymes, UCHL5 (UCH37) and USP15, which may be recruited to ubiquitinated TGFBR1 by SMAD7 (Wicks et al. 2005, Eichhorn et al. 2012). <br> <br>Basal levels of SMAD2 and SMAD3 are maintained by SMURF2 and STUB1 ubiquitin ligases. SMURF2 is able to bind and ubiquitinate SMAD2, leading to SMAD2 degradation (Zhang et al. 2001), but this has been questioned by a recent study of Smurf2 knockout mice (Tang et al. 2011). STUB1 (CHIP) binds and ubiquitinates SMAD3, leading to SMAD3 degradation (Li et al. 2004, Xin et al. 2005). PMEPA1 can bind and sequester unphosphorylated SMAD2 and SMAD3, preventing their activation in response to TGF-beta signaling. In addition, PMEPA1 can bind and sequester phosphorylated SMAD2 and SMAD3, preventing formation of SMAD2/3:SMAD4 heterotrimer complexes (Watanabe et al. 2010). A protein phosphatase MTMR4, residing in the membrane of early endosomes, can dephosphorylate activated SMAD2 and SMAD3, preventing formation of SMAD2/3:SMAD4 complexes (Yu et al. 2010). <br>
R-HSA-186763	Downstream signal transduction	The role of autophosphorylation sites on PDGF receptors are to provide docking sites for downstream signal transduction molecules which contain SH2 domains. The SH2 domain is a conserved motif of around 100 amino acids that can bind a phosphorylated tyrosine residue. These downstream molecules are activated upon binding to, or phosphorylated by, the receptor kinases intrinsic to PDGF receptors.<br>Some of the dowstream molecules are themselves enzymes, such as phosphatidylinositol 3'-kinase (PI3K), phospholipase C (PLC-gamma), the Src family of tyrosine kinases, the tyrosine phosphatase SHP2, and a GTPase activating protein (GAP) for Ras. Others such as Grb2 are adaptor molecules which link the receptor with downstream catalytic molecules.
R-HSA-1168372	Downstream signaling events of B Cell Receptor (BCR)	Second messengers (calcium, diacylglycerol, inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate, and phosphatidyinositol 3,4,5-trisphosphate) trigger signaling pathways: NF-kappaB is activated via protein kinase C beta, RAS via RasGRP proteins, NF-AT via calcineurin, and AKT via PDK1 (reviewed in Shinohara and Kurosaki 2009, Stone 2006).
R-HSA-5654687	Downstream signaling of activated FGFR1	Signaling via FGFRs is mediated via direct recruitment of signaling proteins that bind to tyrosine auto-phosphorylation sites on the activated receptor and via closely linked docking proteins that become tyrosine phosphorylated in response to FGF-stimulation and form a complex with additional complement of signaling proteins. <br><br>The activation loop in the catalytic domain of FGFR maintains the PTK domain in an inactive or low activity state. The activation-loop of FGFR1, for instance, contains two tyrosine residues that must be autophosphorylated for maintaining the catalytic domain in an active state. In the autoinhibited configuration, a kinase invariant proline residue at the C-terminal end of the activation loop interferes with substrate binding while allowing access to ATP in the nucleotide binding site.<br>In addition to the catalytic PTK core, the cytoplasmic domain of FGFR contains several regulatory sequences. The juxtamembrane domain of FGFRs is considerably longer than that of other receptor tyrosine kinases. This region contains a highly conserved sequence that serves as a binding site for the phosphotyrosine binding (PTB) domain of FRS2. A variety of signaling proteins are phosphorylated in response to FGF stimulation, including Shc, phospholipase-C gamma and FRS2 leading to stimulation of intracellular signaling pathways that control cell proliferation, cell differentiation, cell migration, cell survival and cell shape.
R-HSA-5654696	Downstream signaling of activated FGFR2	Signaling via FGFRs is mediated via direct recruitment of signaling proteins that bind to tyrosine auto-phosphorylation sites on the activated receptor and via closely linked docking proteins that become tyrosine phosphorylated in response to FGF-stimulation and form a complex with additional complement of signaling proteins. <br><br>The activation loop in the catalytic domain of FGFR maintains the PTK domain in an inactive or low activity state. The activation-loop of FGFR1, for instance, contains two tyrosine residues that must be autophosphorylated for maintaining the catalytic domain in an active state. In the autoinhibited configuration, a kinase invariant proline residue at the C-terminal end of the activation loop interferes with substrate binding while allowing access to ATP in the nucleotide binding site.<br>In addition to the catalytic PTK core, the cytoplasmic domain of FGFR contains several regulatory sequences. The juxtamembrane domain of FGFRs is considerably longer than that of other receptor tyrosine kinases. This region contains a highly conserved sequence that serves as a binding site for the phosphotyrosine binding (PTB) domain of FRS2. A variety of signaling proteins are phosphorylated in response to FGF stimulation, including Shc, phospholipase-C gamma and FRS2 leading to stimulation of intracellular signaling pathways that control cell proliferation, cell differentiation, cell migration, cell survival and cell shape.
R-HSA-5654708	Downstream signaling of activated FGFR3	Signaling via FGFRs is mediated via direct recruitment of signaling proteins that bind to tyrosine auto-phosphorylation sites on the activated receptor and via closely linked docking proteins that become tyrosine phosphorylated in response to FGF-stimulation and form a complex with additional complement of signaling proteins. <br><br>The activation loop in the catalytic domain of FGFR maintains the PTK domain in an inactive or low activity state. The activation-loop of FGFR1, for instance, contains two tyrosine residues that must be autophosphorylated for maintaining the catalytic domain in an active state. In the autoinhibited configuration, a kinase invariant proline residue at the C-terminal end of the activation loop interferes with substrate binding while allowing access to ATP in the nucleotide binding site.<br>In addition to the catalytic PTK core, the cytoplasmic domain of FGFR contains several regulatory sequences. The juxtamembrane domain of FGFRs is considerably longer than that of other receptor tyrosine kinases. This region contains a highly conserved sequence that serves as a binding site for the phosphotyrosine binding (PTB) domain of FRS2. A variety of signaling proteins are phosphorylated in response to FGF stimulation, including Shc, phospholipase-C gamma and FRS2 leading to stimulation of intracellular signaling pathways that control cell proliferation, cell differentiation, cell migration, cell survival and cell shape.
R-HSA-5654716	Downstream signaling of activated FGFR4	Signaling via FGFRs is mediated via direct recruitment of signaling proteins that bind to tyrosine auto-phosphorylation sites on the activated receptor and via closely linked docking proteins that become tyrosine phosphorylated in response to FGF-stimulation and form a complex with additional complement of signaling proteins. <br><br>The activation loop in the catalytic domain of FGFR maintains the PTK domain in an inactive or low activity state. The activation-loop of FGFR1, for instance, contains two tyrosine residues that must be autophosphorylated for maintaining the catalytic domain in an active state. In the autoinhibited configuration, a kinase invariant proline residue at the C-terminal end of the activation loop interferes with substrate binding while allowing access to ATP in the nucleotide binding site.<br>In addition to the catalytic PTK core, the cytoplasmic domain of FGFR contains several regulatory sequences. The juxtamembrane domain of FGFRs is considerably longer than that of other receptor tyrosine kinases. This region contains a highly conserved sequence that serves as a binding site for the phosphotyrosine binding (PTB) domain of FRS2. A variety of signaling proteins are phosphorylated in response to FGF stimulation, including Shc, phospholipase-C gamma and FRS2 leading to stimulation of intracellular signaling pathways that control cell proliferation, cell differentiation, cell migration, cell survival and cell shape.
R-HSA-202424	Downstream TCR signaling	Changes in gene expression are required for the T cell to gain full proliferative competence and to produce effector cytokines. Three transcription factors in particular have been found to play a key role in TCR-stimulated changes in gene expression, namely NF-kB, NFAT and AP-1. <p>A key step in NF-kB activation is the stimulation and translocation of PKC theta. The critical element that effects PKC theta activation is PI3K. This enzyme complex translocates to the plasma membrane by interacting with phospho-tyrosines on CD28 via its two SH2 domains located in p85 subunit. The p110 subunit of PI3K phosphorylates the inositol ring of PIP2 to generate PIP3 (steps 17-18). PIP3 may also be dephosphorylated by the phosphatase SHIP to generate PI-3,4-P2.<p>PIP3 and PI-3,4-P2 acts as binding sites to the PH domain of PKB/Akt and PDK1 (steps 19, 21 and 22). PKB is activated in response to PI3K stimulation by PDK1 (step 23). PDK1 has an essential role in regulating the activation of PKC theta and recruitment of CBM complex to the immune synapse. PKC theta is a member of novel class (DAG dependent, Ca++ independent) of PKC and the only member known to translocate to this synapse. Prior to TCR stimulation PKC theta exists in an inactive closed conformation. Upon release of DAG, it binds to PKC theta via the C1 domain and undergoes phosphorylation on tyrosine 90 by Lck to attain an open conformation. PKC theta is further phosphorylated by PDK1 on threonine 538. This step is critical for PKC activity (steps 24-26). <p>CARMA1 translocates to the plasma membrane following the interaction of its SH3 domain with the 'PxxP' motif on PDK1. CARMA1 is phosphorylated by PKC-theta on residue S552, leading to the oligomerization of CARMA1. This complex acts as a scaffold, recruiting Bcl10 to the synapse by interacting with their CARD domains. <p>Bcl10 undergoes phosphorylation mediated by the enzyme RIP2. Activated Bcl10 then mediates the ubiquitination of NEMO by recruiting MALT1 and TRAF6. MALT1 binds to Bcl10 with its Ig-like domains and undergoes oligomerization. TRAF6 binds to the oligomerized MALT1 and also undergoes oligomerization. <p>Oligomerized TRAF6 acts as a ubiquitin-protein ligase, catalyzing auto-K63-linked polyubiquitination (steps 27-33). This K-63 ubiquitinated TRAF6 activates TAK1 kinase bound to TAB2 and also ubiquitinates NEMO/IKK-gamma in the IKK complex. TAK1 undergoes autophosphorylation on residues T184 and T187 and gets activated. Activated TAK1 kinase phosphorylates IKK-beta on residues S177 and S181 in the activation loop and activates the IKK kinase activity. IKK-beta phosphorylates the IkB-alpha bound to the NF-kB heterodimer, on residues S19 and S23 and directs IkB-beta to 26S proteasome degradation (step 34-38 & 40). <p>The NF-kB heterodimer with a free NTS sequence finally migrates to the nucleus to regulate gene transcription (step 39). 
R-HSA-376172	DSCAM interactions	DSCAM (Down syndrome cell adhesion molecule) is one of the members of the Ig superfamily CAMs with a domain architecture comprising 10 Ig domains, 6 fibronectin type III (FN) repeats, a single transmembrane and a C terminal cytoplasmic domain. DSCAM is implicated in Down syndrome (DS) due to the chromosomal location of the DSCAM gene, but no evidence supports a direct involvement of DSCAM with DS. It likely functions as a cell surface receptor mediating axon pathfinding. Besides these important implications, little is known about the physiological function or the molecular mechanism of DSCAM signal transduction in mammalian systems. A closely related DSCAM paralogue Down syndrome cell adhesion moleculelike protein 1 (DSCAML1) is present in humans. Both these proteins are involved in homophilic intercellular interactions.
R-HSA-5696400	Dual Incision in GG-NER	Double incision at the damaged DNA strand excises the oligonucleotide that contains the lesion from the open bubble. The excised oligonucleotide is ~27-30 bases long. Incision 5' to the damage site, by ERCC1:ERCC4 endonuclease, precedes the incision 3' to the damage site by ERCC5 endonuclease (Staresincic et al. 2009).
R-HSA-6782135	Dual incision in TC-NER	In transcription-coupled nucleotide excision repair (TC-NER), similar to global genome nucleotide excision repair (GG-NER), the oligonucleotide that contains the lesion is excised from the open bubble structure via dual incision of the affected DNA strand. 5' incision by the ERCC1:ERCC4 (ERCC1:XPF) endonuclease precedes 3' incision by ERCC5 (XPG) endonuclease. In order for the TC-NER pre-incision complex to assemble and the endonucleases to incise the damaged DNA strand, the RNA polymerase II (RNA Pol II) complex has to backtrack - reverse translocate from the damage site. Although the mechanistic details of this process are largely unknown in mammals, it may involve ERCC6/ERCC8-mediated chromatin remodelling/ubiquitination events, the DNA helicase activity of the TFIIH complex and TCEA1 (TFIIS)-stimulated cleavage of the 3' protruding end of nascent mRNA by RNA Pol II (Donahue et al. 1994, Lee et al. 2002, Sarker et al. 2005, Vermeulen and Fousteri 2013, Hanawalt and Spivak 2008, Staresincic et al. 2009, Epshtein et al. 2014).
R-HSA-113510	E2F mediated regulation of DNA replication	Progression through G1 and G1 to S-phase transition that initiates DNA synthesis involve many complexes that are regulated by RB1:E2F pathway. RB1:E2F pathway plays a key role in gene expression regulation in proliferating and differentiated cells. As a repressor, E2F remains bound to RB1; it can activate the expression of S-phase genes involved in DNA replication after the phosphorylation of RB1.<BR>E2F proteins regulate expression of genes involved in various processes thereby forming interlinks between cell cycle, DNA synthesis, DNA damage recognition etc.<BR>In this module, activation of replication related genes by E2F1 and two ways by which E2F1 regulates DNA replication initiation are annotated. Detailed connection between the E2F protein function and various pathways will be covered in future releases of Reactome.
R-HSA-113507	E2F-enabled inhibition of pre-replication complex formation	Under specific conditions, Cyclin B, a mitotic cyclin, can inhibit the functions of pre-replicative complex. E2F1 activates Cdc25A protein which regulates Cyclin B in a positive manner. Cyclin B/Cdk1 function is restored which leads to the disruption of pre-replicative complex. This phenomenon has been demonstrated by Bosco et al (2001) in Drosophila.
R-HSA-162594	Early Phase of HIV Life Cycle	In the <b>early phase </b> of HIV lifecycle, an active virion binds and enters a target cell mainly by specific interactions of the viral envelope proteins with host cell surface receptors. The virion core is uncoated to expose a viral nucleoprotein complex containing RNA and viral proteins. HIV RNA genome is reverse transcribed by the viral Reverse Transcriptase to form a cDNA copy, that gets inserted into host cell DNA. The viral Integrase enzyme is vital to carry out the integration of the viral cDNA into the host genome. The host DNA repair enzymes probably repair the breaks in DNA at the sites of integration.
R-HSA-3000178	ECM proteoglycans	Proteoglycans are major components of the extracellular matrix. In cartilage the matrix constitutes more than 90% of tissue dry weight. Proteoglycans are proteins substituted with glycosaminoglycans (GAGs), linear polysaccharides consisting of a repeating disaccharide, generally of an acetylated amino sugar alternating<br>with a uronic acid. Most proteoglycans are located in the extracellular<br>space. Proteoglycans are highly diverse, both in terms of the core proteins and the subtypes of GAG chains, namely chondroitin sulfate (CS), keratan sulfate (KS), dermatan sulfate (DS) and heparan sulfate (HS). Hyaluronan is a non-sulfated GAG whose molecular weight runs into millions of Dalton; in articular cartilage, a single hyaluronan molecule can hold upto 100 aggrecan molecules and these aggregates are stabilized by a link protein. 
R-HSA-114508	Effects of PIP2 hydrolysis	Hydrolysis of phosphatidyl inositol-bisphosphate (PIP2) by phospholipase C (PLC) produces diacylglycerol (DAG) and inositol triphosphate (IP3). Both are potent second messengers. IP3 diffuses into the cytosol, but as DAG is a hydrophobic lipid it remains within the plasma membrane. IP3 stimulates the release of calcium ions from the smooth endoplasmic reticulum, while DAG activates the conventional and unconventional protein kinase C (PKC) isoforms, facilitating the translocation of PKC from the cytosol to the plasma membrane. The effects of DAG are mimicked by tumor-promoting phorbol esters. DAG is also a precursor for the biosynthesis of prostaglandins, the endocannabinoid 2-arachidonoylglycerol and an activator of a subfamily of TRP-C (Transient Receptor Potential Canonical) cation channels 3, 6, and 7.
R-HSA-182971	EGFR downregulation	Regulation of receptor tyrosine kinase (RTK) activity is implicated in the control of almost all cellular functions. One of the best understood RTKs is epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR). Growth factors can bind to EGFR and activate it to initiate signalling cascades within the cell. EGFRs can also be recruited to clathrin-coated pits which can be internalised into endocytic vesicles. From here, EGFRs can either be recycled back to the plasma membrane or directed to lysosomes for destruction.This provides a mechanism by which EGFR signalling is negatively regulated and controls the strength and duration of EGFR-induced signals. It also prevents EGFR hyperactivation as commonly seen in tumorigenesis.<br><br>The proto-oncogene Cbl can negatively regulate EGFR signalling. The Cbl family of RING-type ubiquitin ligases are able to poly-ubiquitinate EGFR, an essential step in EGFR degradation. All Cbl proteins have a unique domain that recognises phosphorylated tyrosine residues on activated EGFRs. They also direct the ubiquitination and degradation of activated EGFRs by recruiting ubiquitin-conjugation enzymes. Cbl proteins function by specifically targeting activated EGFRs and mediating their down-regulation, thus providing a means by which signaling processes can be negatively regulated.<br><br>Cbl also promotes receptor internalization via it's interaction with an adaptor protein, CIN85 (Cbl-interacting protein of 85kDa). CIN85 binds to Cbl via it's SH3 domain and is enhanced by the EGFR-induced tyrosine phosphorylation of Cbl. The proline-rich region of CIN85 interacts with endophilins which are regulatory components of clathrin-coated vesicles (CCVs). Endophilins bind to membranes and induce membrane curvature, in conjunction with other proteins involved in CCV formation. The rapid recruitment of endophilin to the activated receptor complex by CIN85 is the mechanism which controls receptor internalization.
R-HSA-212718	EGFR interacts with phospholipase C-gamma	Activated epidermal growth factor receptors (EGFR) can stimulate phosphatidylinositol (PI) turnover. Activated EGFR can activate phospholipase C-gamma1 (PLC-gamma1, i.e. PLCG1) which hydrolyses phosphatidylinositol 4,5-bisphosphate (PIP2) to inositol 1,4,5-triphosphate (IP3) and diacylglycerol (DAG). IP3 is instrumental in the release of calcium from intracellular stores and DAG is involved in protein kinase C activation.
R-HSA-2179392	EGFR Transactivation by Gastrin	Gastrin, through the action of diacylglycerol produced from downstream G alpha (q) events, transactivates EGFR via a PKC-mediated pathway by activation of MMP3 (Matrix Metalloproteinase 3) which allows formation of mature HBEGF (heparin-binding epidermal growth factor) by cleaving pro-HBEGF. Mature HBEGF is then free to bind the EGFR, resulting in EGFR activation (Dufresne et al. 2006, Liebmann 2011).
R-HSA-391903	Eicosanoid ligand-binding receptors	Eicosanoids, derived from polyunsaturated 20-carbon fatty acids, are paracrine and autocrine regulators of inflammation, smooth muscle contraction, and blood coagulation. The actions of eicosanoids are mediated by eicosanoid receptors, most of which are GPCRs. There are four types of eicosanoid GPCRs in humans; leukotriene, lipoxin (Brink C et al, 2003), prostanoid (Coleman RA et al, 1994) and oxoeicosanoid (Brink C et al, 2004) receptors. 
R-HSA-211979	Eicosanoids	Arachidonic acid is metabolized via three major enzymatic pathways: cyclooxygenase, lipoxygenase, and cytochrome P450. The cytochrome P450 pathway metabolites are oxygenated metabolites of arachidonic acid.
R-HSA-1566948	Elastic fibre formation	Elastic fibres (EF) are a major structural constituent of dynamic connective tissues such as large arteries and lung parenchyma, where they provide essential properties of elastic recoil and resilience. EF are composed of a central cross-linked core of elastin, surrounded by a mesh of microfibrils, which are composed largely of fibrillin. In addition to elastin and fibrillin-1, over 30 ancillary proteins are involved in mediating important roles in elastic fibre assembly as well as interactions with the surrounding environment. These include fibulins, elastin microfibril interface located proteins (EMILINs), microfibril-associated glycoproteins (MAGPs) and Latent TGF-beta binding proteins (LTBPs). Fibulin-5 for example, is expressed by vascular smooth muscle cells and plays an essential role in the formation of elastic fibres through mediating interactions between elastin and fibrillin (Yanigasawa et al. 2002, Freeman et al. 2005). In addition, it plays a role in cell adhesion through integrin receptors and has been shown to influence smooth muscle cell proliferation (Yanigasawa et al. 2002, Nakamura et al. 2002). EMILINs are a family of homologous glycoproteins originally identified in extracts of aortas. Found at the elastin-fibrillin interface, early studies showed that antibodies to EMILIN can affect the process of elastic fibre formation (Bressan et al. 1993). EMILIN1 has been shown to bind elastin and fibulin-5 and appears to coordinate their common interaction (Zanetti et al. 2004). MAGPs are found to co-localize with microfibrils. MAGP-1, for example, binds strongly to an N-terminal sequence of fibrillin-1. Other proteins found associated with microfibrils include vitronectin (Dahlback et al. 1990).<br><br>Fibrillin is most familiar as a component of elastic fibres but microfibrils with no elastin are found in the ciliary zonules of the eye and invertebrate circulatory systems. The addition of elastin to microfibrils is a vertebrate adaptation to high pulsatile pressures in their closed circulatory systems (Faury et al. 2003). Elastin appears to have emerged after the divergence of jawless vertebrates from other vertebrates (Sage 1982). <br><br>Fibrillin-1 is the major structural component of microfibrils. Fibrillin-2 is expressed earlier in development than fibrillin-1 and may be important for elastic fiber formation (Zhang et al. 1994). Fibrillin-3 arose as a duplication of fibrillin-2 that did not occur in the rodent lineage. It was first isolated from human brain (Corson et al. 2004).<br><br>Fibrillin assembly is not as well defined as elastin assembly. The primary structure of fibrillin is dominated by calcium binding epidermal growth factor like repeats (Kielty et al. 2002). Fibrillin may form dimers or trimers before secretion. However, multimerisation predominantly occurs outside the cell. Formation of fibrils appears to require cell surface structures suggesting an involvement of cell surface receptors. Fibrillin is assembled pericellularly (i.e. on or close to the cell surface) into microfibrillar arrays that undergo time dependent maturation into microfibrils with beaded-string appearance. Transglutaminase forms gamma glutamyl epsilon lysine isopeptide bonds within or between peptide chains. Additionally, intermolecular disulfide bond formation between fibrillins is an important contributor to fibril maturation (Reinhardt et al. 2000).<br><br>Models of fibrillin-1 microfibril structure suggest that the N-terminal half of fibrillin-1 is asymmetrically exposed in outer filaments, while the C-terminal half is buried in the interior (Kuo et al. 2007). Fibrillinopathies include Marfan syndrome, familial ectopia lentis, familial thoracic aneurysm, all due to mutations in the fibrillin-1 gene FBN1, and congenital contractural arachnodactyly which is caused by mutation of FBN2 (Maslen & Glanville 1993, Davis & Summers 2012).<br><br>In vivo assembly of fibrillin requires the presence of extracellular fibronectin fibres (Sabatier et al. 2009). Fibrillins have Arg-Gly-Asp (RGD) sequences that interact with integrins (Pfaff et al. 1996, Sakamoto et al. 1996, Bax et al., 2003, Jovanovic et al. 2008) and heparin-binding domains that interact with a cell-surface heparan sulfate proteoglycan (Tiedemann et al. 2001) possibly a syndecan (Ritty et al. 2003). Fibrillins also have a major role in binding and sequestering growth factors such as TGF beta into the ECM (Neptune et al. 2003). Proteoglycans such as versican (Isogai et al. 2002), biglycan, and decorin (Reinboth et al. 2002) can interact with the microfibrils. They confer specific properties including hydration, impact absorption, molecular sieving, regulation of cellular activities, mediation of growth factor association, and release and transport within the extracellular matrix (Buczek-Thomas et al. 2002). In addition, glycosaminoglycans have been shown to interact with tropoelastin through its lysine side chains (Wu et al. 1999), regulating tropoelastin assembly (Tu & Weiss 2008).<br><br>Elastin is synthesized as a 70kDa monomer called tropoelastin, a highly hydrophobic protein composed largely of two types of domains that alternate along the polypeptide chain. Hydrophobic domains are rich in glycine, proline, alanine, leucine and valine. These amino acids occur in characteristic short (3-9 amino acids) tandem repeats, with a flexible and highly dynamic structure (Floquet et al. 2004). Unlike collagen, glycine in elastin is not rigorously positioned every 3 residues. However, glycine is distributed frequently throughout all hydrophobic domains of elastin, and displays a strong preference for inter-glycine spacing of 0-3 residues (Rauscher et al. 2006). <br><br>Elastic fibre formation involves the deposition of tropoelastin onto a template of fibrillin rich microfibrils. Recent results suggest that the first step of elastic fiber formation is the organization of small globules of elastin on the cell surface followed by globule aggregation into microfibres (Kozel et al. 2006). An important contribution to the initial stages assembly is thought to be made by the intrinsic ability of the protein to direct its own polymeric organization in a process termed 'coacervation' (Bressan et al. 1986). This self-assembly process appears to be determined by interactions between hydrophobic domains (Bressan et al. 1986, Vrhovski et al. 1997, Bellingham et al. 2003, Cirulis & Keeley 2010) which result in alignment of the cross-linking domains, allowing the stabilization of elastin through the formation of cross-links generated through the oxidative deamination of lysine residues, catalyzed by members of the lysyl oxidase (LOX) family (Reiser et al. 1992, Mithieux & Weiss 2005). The first step in the cross-linking reaction is the oxidative formation of the delta aldehyde, known as alpha aminoadipic semialdehyde or allysine (Partridge 1963). Subsequent reactions that are probably spontaneous lead to the formation of cross-links through dehydrolysinonorleucine and allysine aldol, a trifunctional cross-link dehydromerodesmosine and two tetrafunctional cross-links desmosine and isodesmosine (Lucero & Kagan 2006), which are unique to elastin. These cross-links confer mechanical integrity and high durability. In addition to their role in self-assembly, hydrophobic domains provide elastin with its elastomeric properties, with initial studies suggesting that the elastomeric propereties of elastin are driven through changes in entropic interactions with surrounding water molecules (Hoeve & Flory 1974). <br><br>A very specific set of proteases, broadly grouped under the name elastases, is responsible for elastin remodelling (Antonicelli et al. 2007). The matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) are particularly important in elastin breakdown, with MMP2, 3, 9 and 12 explicitly shown to degrade elastin (Ra & Parks 2007). Nonetheless, elastin typically displays a low turnover rate under normal conditions over a lifetime (Davis 1993).
R-HSA-112303	Electric Transmission Across Gap Junctions	Electrical synapses are found in all nervous systems, including the human brain. The membranes of the two communicating neurons come extremely close at the synapse and are actually linked together by an intercellular specialization called a gap junction. Gap junctions contain precisely aligned, paired channels in the membrane of the pre- and postsynaptic neurons, such that each channel pair forms a pore. Electrical synapses thus work by allowing ionic current to flow passively through the gap junction pores from one neuron to another. Because passive current flow across the gap junction is virtually instantaneous, communication can occur without the delay that is characteristic of chemical synapses.
R-HSA-2395516	Electron transport from NADPH to Ferredoxin	NADPH, ferredoxin reductase (FDXR, Adrenodoxin reductase), and ferredoxins (FDX1, FDX1L) comprise a short electron transport chain that provides electrons for biosynthesis of iron-sulfur clusters and steroid hormones (Sheftel et al. 2010, Shi et al. 2012, reviewed in Grinberg et al. 2000, Lambeth et al. 1982).
R-HSA-139853	Elevation of cytosolic Ca2+ levels	Activation of non- excitable cells involves the agonist-induced elevation of cytosolic Ca2+, an essential process for platelet activation. It occurs through Ca2+ release from intracellular stores and Ca2+ entry through the plasma membrane. Ca2+ store release involves phospholipase C (PLC)-mediated production of inositol-1,4,5-trisphosphate (IP3), which in turn stimulates IP3 receptor channels to release Ca2+ from intracellular stores. This is followed by Ca2+ entry into the cell through plasma membrane calcium channels, a process referred to as store-operated calcium entry (SOCE). Stromal interaction molecule 1 (STIM1), a Ca2+ sensor molecule in intracellular stores, and the four transmembrane channel protein Orai1 are the key players in platelet SOCE. Other major Ca2+ entry mechanisms are mediated by the direct receptor-operated calcium (ROC) channel, P2X1 and transient receptor potential channels (TRPCs).
R-HSA-211976	Endogenous sterols	A number of CYPs take part in cholesterol biosynthesis and elimination, thus playing an important role in maintaining cholesterol homeostasis. Under normal physiological conditions, cholesterol intake (diet or synthesized de novo from acetyl CoA) equals cholesterol elimination (degraded to bile salts, secreted in bile and used in steroid hormone synthesis). These processes are under tight regulatory control and any disruption leads to increased cholesterol levels resulting in cardiovacular disease. The CYPs involved in cholesterol homeostasis could serve as potential targets for cholesterol-lowering drugs (Lewis 2004, Guengerich 2006, Pikuleva 2006).
R-HSA-917729	Endosomal Sorting Complex Required For Transport (ESCRT)	Many plasma membrane proteins are in a constant flux throughout the internal trafficking pathways of the cell. Some receptors are continuously internalized into recycling endosomes and returned to the cell surface. Others are sorted into intralumenal vesicles of morphologically distinctive endosomes that are known as multivesicular bodies (MVBs). These MVBs fuse with lysosomes, resulting in degradation of their cargo by lysosomal acidic hydrolases.<br> Endosomes can be operationally defined as being either early or late, referring to the relative time it takes for endocytosed material to reach either stage. Ultrastructural studies indicate that early endosomes are predominantly tubulovesicular structures, which constitute a major sorting platform in the cell, whereas late endosomes show the characteristics of typical MVBs and are capable of fusing with lysosomes.<br> A well characterized signal for shunting membrane proteins into the degradative MVB pathway is the ubiquitylation of these cargoes. At the center of a vast protein:protein and protein:lipid interaction network that underpins ubiquitin mediated sorting to the lysosome are the endosomal sorting complexes required for transport (ESCRTs), which are conserved throughout all major eukaryotic taxa.
R-HSA-1236977	Endosomal/Vacuolar pathway	Some antigens are cross-presented through a vacuolar mechanism that involves generation of antigenic peptides and their loading on to MHC-I molecules within the endosomal compartment in a proteasome and TAP-independent manner. Antigens within the endosome are processed by cathepsin S and other proteases into antigenic peptides. Loading of these peptides onto MHC-I molecules occurs directly within early and late endosomal compartments. Why certain antigens are cross-presented exclusively by the cytosolic pathway while others use the vacuolar pathway is unknown. It may be because some epitopes cannot be generated by endosomal proteolysis, or are completely destroyed. Alternatively, the physical form of the antigen may influence its accessibility to the endosomal or vacuolar pathways (Shen et al. 2004).
R-HSA-380972	Energy dependent regulation of mTOR by LKB1-AMPK	Upon formation of a trimeric LKB1:STRAD:MO25 complex, LKB1 phosphorylates and activates AMPK. This phosphorylation is immediately removed in basal conditions by PP2C, but if the cellular AMP:ATP ratio rises, this activation is maintained, as AMP binding by AMPK inhibits the dephosphorylation. AMPK then activates the TSC complex by phosphorylating TSC2. Active TSC activates the intrinsic GTPase activity of Rheb, resulting in GDP-loaded Rheb and inhibition of mTOR pathway.
R-HSA-203615	eNOS activation	eNOS activity is regulated by numerous post-translational modifications including phosphorylation and acylation, which also modulate its interactions with other proteins and its subcellular localization.<p>In general, following myristoylation and palmitoylation, eNOS localizes to caveolae in the plasma membrane, where in resting cells, it is bound to caveolin and remains inactive. Several agonists that raise intracellular calcium concentrations promote calmodulin binding to eNOS and the dissociation of caveolin from the enzyme, leading to an activated eNOS-calmodulin complex.<p>Phosphorylation plays a significant role in regulating eNOS activity, especially the phosphorylation of Ser1177, located within the reductase domain, which increases enzyme activity by enhancing reductase activity and calcium sensitivity. In unstimulated, cultured endothelial cells, Ser1177 is rapidly phosphorylated following a variety of stimuli: fluid shear stress, insulin, estrogen, VEGF, or bradykinin. The kinases involved in this process depend upon the stimuli applied. For instance, shear stress phosphorylates Ser1177 by activating Akt and PKA; insulin activates both Akt and the AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK); estrogen and VEGF mainly phosphorylate eNOS via Akt; whereas the bradykinin-induced phosphorylation of Ser1177 is mediated by CaMKII. When Ser1177 is phosphorylated, NO production is increased several-fold above basal levels.<p>The phosphorylation of a threonine residue (Thr 495), located in the CaM binding domain, is associated with a decrease in eNOS activity. When this residue is dephosphorylated, substantially more CaM binds to eNOS and elevates enzyme activity. Stimuli associated with dephosphorylation of Thr495 (e.g., bradykinin, histamine, and Ca2+ ionophores) also increase Ca2+ levels resulting in the phosphorylation of Ser1177.<p>Additional phosphorylation sites, such as Ser114 and Ser633, and tyrosine phosphorylation have all been detected, but their functional relevance remains unclear. It is speculated that the tyrosine phosphorylation of eNOS is unlikely to affect enzyme activity directly, but more likely to impact the protein-protein interactions with associated scaffolding and regulatory proteins.
R-HSA-203765	eNOS activation and regulation	Originally identified as endothelium-derived relaxing factor, eNOS derived NO is a critical signaling molecule in vascular homeostasis. It regulates blood pressure and vascular tone, and is involved in vascular smooth muscle cell proliferation, platelet aggregation, and leukocyte adhesion. Loss of the bioavailability of endothelium derived NO is a key feature of endothelial dysfunction and is implicated in the pathogenesis of cardiovascular disease such as hypertension and atherosclerosis. The endothelial isoform eNOS is unique among the nitric oxide synthase (NOS) family in that it is co-translationally modified at its amino terminus by myristoylation and is further acylated by palmitoylation (two residues next to the myristoylation site). These modifications target eNOS to the plasma membrane caveolae and lipid rafts. <br><br>eNOS activation and subsequent nitric oxide (NO) production is stimulated by a variety of stimuli, such as fluid shear stress generated by blood flow, vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF), bradykinin, estrogen, insulin, and angiopoietin. The activity of eNOS is further regulated by numerous post-translational modifications, including protein-protein interactions, phosphorylation, and subcellular localization.<br><br>Following activation, eNOS shuttles between caveolae and other subcellular compartments such as the noncaveolar plasma membrane portions, Golgi apparatus, and perinuclear structures. This subcellular distribution is variable depending upon cell type and mode of activation. Subcellular localization of eNOS has a profound effect on its ability to produce NO as the availability of its substrates and cofactors will vary with location. eNOS is primarily particulate, and depending on the cell type, eNOS can be found in several membrane compartments: plasma membrane caveolae, lipid rafts, and intracellular membranes such as the Golgi complex. In addition, it has been reported that eNOS can also be detected in the nucleus, however, the conditions associated with nuclear localization of eNOS and its precise role in this cell compartment remains to be determined. <br><br>Several stimuli can trigger a transient displacement of eNOS from the plasma membrane to other subcellular locations. This process can be mediated through various protein-protein interactions and/or changes in post-translational modifications. Knowledge of the precise molecular mechanisms governing the intracellular redistribution process is still rather limited.
R-HSA-168275	Entry of Influenza Virion into Host Cell via Endocytosis	Virus particles bound to the cell surface can be internalized by four mechanisms. Most internalization appears to be mediated by clathrin-coated pits, but internalization via caveolae, macropinocytosis, and by non-clathrin, non-caveolae pathways has also been described for influenza viruses.
R-HSA-379397	Enzymatic degradation of dopamine by COMT	Dopamine once taken up by the dopamine transporter from the extracellular space into the cytosol is metabolized in a two step reaction to homovanillic acid.The first reaction is catalyzed by catecholamine o-methyl transferase and the subsequent reaction is catalyzed by monoamine oxidase A.
R-HSA-379398	Enzymatic degradation of Dopamine by monoamine oxidase	Alternately dopamine is metabolized to homovanillic acid in a two-step reaction in which dopamine is first oxidized to 3,4-dihydroxypheylacetic acid (DOPAC) and then converted to homovanillic acid by catecholamine o-methyltransferase.
R-HSA-3928665	EPH-ephrin mediated repulsion of cells	Despite high-affinity multimeric interaction between EPHs and ephrins (EFNs), the cellular response to EPH-EFN engagement is usually repulsion between the two cells and signal termination. These repulsive responses induce an EPH receptor-expressing cell to retract from an ephrin-expressing cell after establishing initial contact. The repulsive responses mediated by EPH receptors in the growth cone at the leading edge of extending axons and in axonal collateral branches contribute to the formation of selective neuronal connections. It is unclear how high affinity trans-cellular interactions between EPHs and ephrins are broken to convert adhesion into repulsion. Two possible mechanisms have been proposed for the repulsion of EPH-EFN bearing cells: the first one involves regulated cleavage of ephrin ligands or EPH receptors by transmembrane proteases following cell-cell contact, while the second one is rapid endocytosis of whole EPH:EFN complexes during the retraction of the interacting cells or neuronal growth cones (Egea & Klein 2007, Janes et al. 2005). RAC also plays an essential role during growth cone collapse by promoting actin polymerization that drives membrane internalization by endocytosis (Marston et al. 2003).
R-HSA-2682334	EPH-Ephrin signaling	During the development process cell migration and adhesion are the main forces involved in morphing the cells into critical anatomical structures. The ability of a cell to migrate to its correct destination depends heavily on signaling at the cell membrane. Erythropoietin producing hepatocellular carcinoma (EPH) receptors and their ligands, the ephrins (EPH receptors interacting proteins, EFNs), orchestrates the precise control necessary to guide a cell to its destination. They are expressed in all tissues of a developing embryo and are involved in multiple developmental processes such as axon guidance, cardiovascular and skeletal development and tissue patterning. In addition, EPH receptors and EFNs are expressed in developing and mature synapses in the nervous system, where they may have a role in regulating synaptic plasticity and long-term potentiation. Activation of EPHB receptors in neurons induces the rapid formation and enlargement of dendritic spines, as well as rapid synapse maturation (Dalva et al. 2007). On the other hand, EPHA4 activation leads to dendritic spine elimination (Murai et al. 2003, Fu et al. 2007).<br>EPH receptors are the largest known family of receptor tyrosine kinases (RTKs), with fourteen total receptors divided into either A- or B-subclasses: EPHA (1-8 and 10) and EPHB (1-4 and 6). EPH receptors can have overlapping functions, and loss of one receptor can be partially compensated for by another EPH receptor that has similar expression pattern and ligand-binding specificities. EPH receptors have an N-terminal extracellular domain through which they bind to ephrin ligands, a short transmembrane domain, and an intracellular cytoplasmic signaling structure containing a canonical tyrosine kinase catalytic domain as well as other protein interaction sites. Ephrins are also sub-divided into an A-subclass (A1-A5), which are tethered to the plasma membrane by a glycosylphosphatidylinositol (GPI) anchor, and a B-subclass (B1-B3), members of which have a transmembrane domain and a short, highly conserved cytoplasmic tail lacking endogenous catalytic activity. The interaction between EPH receptors and its ligands requires cell-cell interaction since both molecules are membrane-bound. Close contact between EPH receptors and EFNs is required for signaling to occur. EPH/EFN-initiated signaling occurs bi-directionally into either EPH- or EFN-expressing cells or axons. Signaling into the EPH receptor-expressing cell is referred as the forward signal and signaling into the EFN-expressing cell, the reverse signal. (Dalva et al. 2000, Grunwald et al. 2004, Davy & Robbins 2000, Cowan et al. 2004)
R-HSA-3928663	EPHA-mediated growth cone collapse	EPH/Ephrin signaling is coupled to Rho family GTPases such as Rac, Rho and Cdc42 that connect bidirectional receptor-ligand interactions to changes in the actin cytoskeleton (Noren & Pasquale 2004, Groeger & Nobes 2007). RHOA regulates actin dynamics and is involved in EPHA-induced growth cone collapse. This is mediated by ephexins. Ephexin, a guanine nucleotide exchange factor for Rho GTPases, interacts with the EPHA kinase domain and its subsequent activation differentially affects Rho GTPases, such that RHOA is activated, whereas Cdc42 and Rac1 are inhibited. Activation of RHOA, and inhibition of Cdc42 and Rac, shifts actin cytoskeleton to increased contraction and reduced expansion leading to growth-cone collapse (Shamah et al. 2001, Sahin et al. 2005). The activation of EPH receptors in growing neurons typically, but not always, leads to a growth cone collapse response and retraction from an ephrin-expressing substrate (Poliakov et al. 2004, Pasquale 2005). EPHA-mediated repulsive responses prevent axons from growing into regions of excessive ephrin-A concentration, such as the posterior end of the superior colliculus (Pasquale 2005).
R-HSA-3928662	EPHB-mediated forward signaling	Multiple EPHB receptors contribute directly to dendritic spine development and morphogenesis. These are more broadly involved in post-synaptic development through activation of focal adhesion kinase (FAK) and Rho family GTPases and their GEFs. Dendritic spine morphogenesis is a vital part of the process of synapse formation and maturation during CNS development. Dendritic spine morphogenesis is characterized by filopodia shortening followed by the formation of mature mushroom-shaped spines (Moeller et al. 2006). EPHBs control neuronal morphology and motility by modulation of the actin cytoskeleton. EPHBs control dendritic filopodia motility, enabling synapse formation. EPHBs exert these effects through interacting with the guanine exchange factors (GEFs) such as intersectin and kalirin. The intersectin-CDC42-WASP-actin and kalirin-RAC-PAK-actin pathways have been proposed to regulate the EPHB receptor mediated morphogenesis and maturation of dendritic spines in cultured hippocampal and cortical neurons (Irie & Yamaguchi 2002, Penzes et al. 2003). EPHBs are also involved in the regulation of dendritic spine morphology through FAK which activates the RHOA-ROCK-LIMK-1 pathway to suppress cofilin activity and inhibit cofilin-mediated dendritic spine remodeling (Shi et al. 2009).
R-HSA-3928664	Ephrin signaling	The interaction between ephrin (EFN) ligands and EPH receptors results not only in forward signaling through the EPH receptor, but also in 'reverse' signaling through the EFN ligand itself. Reverse signaling through EFNB is required for correct spine morphogenesis and proper path-finding of corpus callosum and dorsal retinal axons. The molecular mechanism by which EFNBs transduce a reverse signal involves phosphorylation of multiple, conserved tyrosines on the intracellular domain of B-type ephrins, facilitating binding of the SH2/SH3 domain adaptor protein GRB4 and subsequent cytoskeletal remodeling (Bruckner et al. 1997, Cowan & Henkemeyer 2001, Lu et al. 2001). The other mechanism of reverse signaling involves the C-terminus PSD-95/Dlg/ZO-1 (PDZ)-binding motif of EFNBs which recruits various PDZ domain containing proteins. Phosphorylation and PDZ-dependent reverse signaling by ephrin-B1 have each been proposed to play important roles in multiple contexts in development and disease (Bush & Soriano 2009). 
R-HSA-212165	Epigenetic regulation of gene expression	Epigenetic processes regulate gene expression by modulating the frequency, rate, or extent of gene expression in a mitotically or meiotically heritable way that does not entail a change in the DNA sequence. Originally the definition applied only to heritability across generations but later also encompassed the heritable changes that occur during cellular differentiation within one organism.<br> Molecular analysis shows epigenetic changes comprise covalent modifications, such as methylation and acetylation, to DNA and histones. RNA interference has been implicated in the initiation of some epigenetic changes, for example transcriptional silencing of transposons. Proteins which bind to the modified DNA and histones are then responsible for repressing transcription and for maintaining the epigenetic modifications during cell division.
R-HSA-901032	ER Quality Control Compartment (ERQC)	Proteins that are released from the CNX or CRT complex with folding defects accumulate in a compartment of the ER called ERQC (Kamhi-Nesher et al. 2001). Here, the enzymes UGGG1 or UGGG2 are able to recognize glycoproteins with minor folding process and re-add the glucose on the alpha,1,3 branch; this is a signal for the transport of these glycoproteins back to the ER, where they can interact again with CNX or CRT in order to achieve a correct folding. At the same time that the glycoprotein is in the ERQC, the enzyme ER mannosidase I progressively removes the mannoses at positions 1A, 2A, B, C on N-glycans; when the mannose on 1A is trimmed, UDP-Glc:glycoprotein glucosyltransferases 1 and 2 (UGGT1 and 2) are no longer able to re-add the glucose, and therefore the protein is destined for ERAD. Glycoproteins subject to endoplasmic reticulum-associated degradation (ERAD) undergo reglucosylation, deglucosylation, and mannose trimming to yield Man6GlcNAc2 and Man5GlcNAc2. These structures lack the mannose residue that is the acceptor of glucose transferred by UGGT1 and 2. For years it has been thought that the removal of the mannose in position B of the N-glycan was the signal to direct proteins to degradation. However, this mechanism has been described better by Avezov et al (Avezov et al. 2008) and it has been demonstrated that even glycoproteins with Man8 or Man7 glycans can be re-glucosylated and interact again with CNX or CRT (for a review on this topic, see Lederkremer 2009 and Maattanen P et al, 2010).
R-HSA-199977	ER to Golgi Anterograde Transport	Secretory cargo destined to be secreted or to arrive at the plasma membrane (PM) leaves the ER via distinct exit sites. This cargo is ultimately destined for the Golgi apparatus.
R-HSA-1236974	ER-Phagosome pathway	The other TAP-dependent cross-presentation mechanism in phagocytes is the endoplasmic reticulum (ER)-phagosome model. Desjardins proposed that ER is recruited to the cell surface, where it fuses with the plasma membrane, underneath phagocytic cups, to supply membrane for the formation of nascent phagosomes (Gagnon et al. 2002). Three independent studies simultaneously showed that ER contributes to the vast majority of phagosome membrane (Guermonprez et al. 2003, Houde et al. 2003, Ackerman et al. 2003). The composition of early phagosome membrane contains ER-resident proteins, the components required for cross-presentation. This model is similar to the phagosome-to-cytosol model in that Ag is translocated to cytosol for proteasomal degradation, but differs in that antigenic peptides are translocated back into the phagosome (instead of ER) for peptide:MHC-I complexes. ER fusion with phagosome introduces molecules that are involved in Ag transport to cytosol (Sec61) and proteasome-generated peptides back into the phagosome (TAP) for loading onto MHC-I. <br>Through extensive biochemical assays, fluorescent imaging and electron microscopy-based experiments, most of the evidence in favor of ER-phagocytosis has been challenged (Touret et al. 2005a/b). Using quantitative proteomics Roger and Foster have shown that the percentage of PM and ER membranes on phagosomes 10 min after internalization was approximately 10% and 0.2% (Rogers et al. 2007). They concluded that ER contributes only a small part of phagosomal membranes.<br>Although the ER-phagosome pathway is controversial, the concept remains attractive as it explains how peptide-receptive MHC-I molecules could intersect with a relatively high concentration of exogenous antigens, presumably a crucial prerequisite for efficient cross-presentation (Basha et al. 2008).
R-HSA-198753	ERK/MAPK targets	ERK/MAPK kinases have a number of targets within the nucleus, usually transcription factors or other kinases. The best known targets, ELK1, ETS1, ATF2, MITF, MAPKAPK2, MSK1, RSK1/2/3 and MEF2 are annotated here.
R-HSA-202670	ERKs are inactivated	MAP Kinases are inactivated by a family of protein named MAP Kinase Phosphatases (MKPs). They act through dephosphorylation of threonine and/or tyrosine residues within the signature sequence -pTXpY- located in the activation loop of MAP kinases (pT=phosphothreonine and pY=phosphotyrosine). MKPs are divided into three major categories depending on their preference for dephosphorylating; tyrosine, serine/threonine and both the tyrosine and threonine (dual specificity phoshatases or DUSPs). The tyrosine-specific MKPs include PTP-SL, STEP and HePTP, serine/threonine-specific MKPs are PP2A and PP2C, and many DUSPs acting on MAPKs are known. Activated MAP kinases trigger activation of transcription of MKP genes. Therefore, MKPs provide a negative feedback regulatory mechanism on MAPK signaling, by inactivating MAPKs via dephosphorylation, in the cytoplasm and the nucleus. Some MKPs are more specific for ERKs, others for JNK or p38MAPK.
R-HSA-1237044	Erythrocytes take up carbon dioxide and release oxygen	Carbon dioxide (CO2) in plasma is hydrated to yield protons (H+) and bicarbonate (HCO3-) by carbonic anhydrase IV (CA4) located on the apical plasma membranes of endothelial cells. Plasma CO2 is also taken up by erythrocytes via AQP1 and RhAG. Within erythrocytes CA1 and, predominantly, CA2 hydrate CO2 to HCO3- and protons (reviewed in Geers & Gros 2000, Jensen 2004, Boron 2010). The HCO3- is transferred out of the erythrocyte by the band 3 anion exchange protein (AE1, SLC4A1) which cotransports a chloride ion (Cl-) into the erythrocyte.<br>Also within the erythrocyte, CO2 combines with the N-terminal alpha amino groups of HbA to form carbamates while protons bind histidine residues in HbA. The net result is the Bohr effect, a conformational change in HbA that reduces its affinity for O2 and hence assists the delivery of O2 to tissues.
R-HSA-1247673	Erythrocytes take up oxygen and release carbon dioxide	Erythrocytes circulating through the capillaries of the lung must exchange carbon dioxide (CO2) for oxygen (O2) during their short (0.5-1 sec.) transit time in pulmonary tissue (Reviewed in Jensen 2004, Esbaugh and Tufts 2006, Boron 2010). CO2 bound as carbamate to the N-terminus of hemoglobin and protons (H+) bound to histidine residues in hemoglobin are released as hemoglobin (HbA) binds O2. Bicarbonate (HCO3-) present in plasma is taken up by erythrocytes via the band3 anion exchanger (AE1, SLC4A1) and combined with H+ by carbonic anhydrases I and II (CA1/CA2) to yield water and CO2 (Reviewed by Esbaugh and Tufts 2006). CO2 is passively transported out of the erythrocyte by AQP1 and RhAG. HCO3- in plasma is also directly dehydrated by extracellular carbonic anhydrase IV (CA4) present on endothelial cells lining the capillaries in the lung.
R-HSA-5657562	Essential fructosuria	Deficiencies in KHK (ketohexokinase) are associated with essential fructosuria (Bonthron et al. 1994).
R-HSA-5662853	Essential pentosuria	Essential pentosuria, the excretion in the urine of high levels of L-xylulose, is a benign autosomal recessive trait found in Ashkenazi Jewish and Lebanese populations. It is due to mutations that inactivate DXCR (L-xylulose reductase) and thus prevent the conversion of L-xylulose to xylitol in the glucuronate pathway (Pierce et al. 2011; Wang & van Eys 1970).
R-HSA-2468052	Establishment of Sister Chromatid Cohesion	The cohesin complex loads onto chromatin in telophase, but its association with chromatin remains transient, dynamic until the S-phase of the cell cycle, presumably because the cohesin-bound NIPBL:MAU2 (SCC2:SCC4) complex promotes chromatin loading, while cohesin-bound WAPAL promotes dissociation from chromatin. Stable binding of cohesin complexes to chromatin, measured by a mean residence time on chromatin, is triggered by DNA replication in S-phase (Gerlich et al. 2006), consistent with establishment of sister chromatid cohesion. <br><br> In S-phase, acetyltransferases ESCO1 and ESCO2 acetylate the SMC3 cohesin subunit (Hou and Zou 2005, Zhang et al. 2008, Nishiyama et al. 2010, Whelan et al. 2012). The acetylation of SMC3, in addition to DNA replication and the presence of PDS5 on cohesin, facilitates the recruitment of CDCA5 (Sororin) to cohesin complexes, an essential step in the establishment of sister chromatid cohesion in mammalian cells (Rankin et al. 2005, Nishiyama et al. 2010). CDCA5 (Sororin) displaces WAPAL from PDS5, thus preventing WAPAL to interfere with the establishment of sister chromatid cohesion (Nishiyama et al. 2010). The establishment and temporal regulation of sister chromatid cohesion is necessary for equal segregation of replicated chromosomes to daughter cells. 
R-HSA-193144	Estrogen biosynthesis	In female vertebrates, estrogens control reproductive system development and reproductive functions (Payne AH and Hales DB, 2004).
R-HSA-71384	Ethanol oxidation	Ethanol and related alcohols can be ingested as part of the diet and are formed by microorganisms in the intestinal tract. Ethanol oxidation to acetate occurs primarily in liver cells in a multistep process first described by Racker (1949). First, in the cytosol, ethanol is oxidized to acetaldehyde, with the formation of NADH. Second, in the mitochondrion, acetaldehyde is oxidized to acetate with the formation of NADH. Finally, acetate in the mitochondrion can be condensed with coenzyme A to form acetyl CoA. Polymorphisms in the enzymes catalyzing the first two steps are associated with variation in the efficiency of alcohol catabolism in human populations (Chen et al. 1999; Lange et al. 1976; Jornvall 1985). The molecular mechanism by which cytosolic acetaldehyde enters the mitochondrial matrix is not known (Lemasters 2007).<p>Cytosolic enzymes capable of oxidizing acetaldehyde to acetate have also been identified and characterized in vitro (Inoue et al. 1979) so a purely cytosolic pathway for ethanol oxidation to acetate and conversion to acetyl-CoA can be annotated. The role of this pathway in vivo is unclear, though limited attempts to correlate deficiencies in the cytosolic enzyme with alcohol intolerance have yielded suggestive data (Yoshida et al. 1989). Additional peroxisomal and microsomal pathways for the oxidation of ethanol to acetaldehyde have been described; their physiological significance is unclear and they are not annotated here.
R-HSA-156842	Eukaryotic Translation Elongation	The translation elongation cycle adds one amino acid at a time to a growing polypeptide according to the sequence of codons found in the mRNA. The next available codon on the mRNA is exposed in the aminoacyl-tRNA (aa-tRNA) binding site (A site) on the 30S subunit.<br>A: Ternary complexes of aa -tRNA:eEF1A:GTP enter the ribosome and enable the anticodon of the tRNA to make a codon/anticodon interaction with the A-site codon of the mRNA. B: Upon cognate recognition, the eEF1A:GTP is brought into the GTPase activating center of the ribosome, GTP is hydrolyzed and eEF1A:GDP leaves the ribosome. C: The peptidyl transferase center of ribosome catalyses the formation of a peptide bond between the incoming amino acid and the peptide found in the peptidyl-tRNA binding site (P site). D: In the pre-translocation state of the ribosome, the eEF2:GTP enters the ribosome, physically translocating the peptidyl-tRNA out of the A site to P site and leaves the ribosome eEF2:GDP. This action of eEF2:GTP accounts for the precise movement of the mRNA by 3 nucleotides.Consequently, deacylated tRNA is shifted to the E site. A ribosome associated ATPase activity is proposed to stimulate the release of deacylated tRNA from the E site subsequent to translocation (Elskaya et al., 1991). In this post-translocation state, the ribosome is now ready to receive a new ternary complex.<br>This process is illustrated below with: an amino acyl-tRNA with an amino acid, a peptidyl-tRNA with a growing peptide, a deacylated tRNA with an -OH, and a ribosome with A,P and E sites to accommodate these three forms of tRNA.
R-HSA-72613	Eukaryotic Translation Initiation	Initiation of translation in the majority of eukaryotic cellular mRNAs depends on the 5'-cap (m7GpppN) and involves ribosomal scanning of the 5' untranslated region (5'-UTR) for an initiating AUG start codon. Therefore, this mechanism is often called cap-dependent translation initiation. Proximity to the cap, as well as the nucleotides surrounding an AUG codon, influence the efficiency of the start site recognition during the scanning process. However, if the recognition site is poor enough, scanning ribosomal subunits will ignore and skip potential starting AUGs, a phenomenon called leaky scanning. Leaky scanning allows a single mRNA to encode several proteins that differ in their amino-termini. Merrick (2010) provides an overview of this process and hghlights several features of it that remain incompletely understood.<p>Several eukaryotic cell and viral mRNAs initiate translation by an alternative mechanism that involves internal initiation rather than ribosomal scanning. These mRNAs contain complex nucleotide sequences, called internal ribosomal entry sites, where ribosomes bind in a cap-independent manner and start translation at the closest downstream AUG codon.<br> Initiation on several viral and cellular mRNAs is cap-independent and is mediated by binding of the ribosome to internal ribosome entry site (IRES) elements. These elements are often found in characteristically long structured regions on the 5'-UTR of an mRNA that may or may not have regulatory upstream open reading frames (uORFs). Both of these features on the 5'-end of the mRNA hinder ribosomal scanning, and thus promote a cap-independent translation initiation mechanism. IRESs act as specific translational enhancers that allow translation initiation to occur in response to specific stimuli and under the control of different trans-acting factors, as for example when cap-dependent protein synthesis is shut off during viral infection. Such regulatory elements have been identified in the mRNAs of growth factors, protooncogenes, angiogenesis factors, and apoptosis regulators, which are translated under a variety of stress conditions, including hypoxia, serum deprivation, irradiation and apoptosis. Thus, cap-independent translational control might have evolved to regulate cellular responses in acute but transient stress conditions that would otherwise lead to cell death, while the same mechanism is of major importance for viral mRNAs to bypass the shutting-off of host protein synthesis after infection. Encephalomyocarditis virus (EMCV) and hepatitis C virus exemplify two distinct mechanisms of IRES-mediated initiation. In contrast to cap-dependent initiation, the eIF4A and eIF4G subunits of eIF4F bind immediately upstream of the EMCV initiation codon and promote binding of a 43S complex. Accordingly, EMCV initiation does not involve scanning and does not require eIF1, eIF1A, and the eIF4E subunit of eIF4F. Nonetheless, initiation on some EMCV-like IRESs requires additional non-canonical initiation factors, which alter IRES conformation and promote binding of eIF4A/eIF4G. Initiation on the hepatitis C virus IRES is simpler: a 43S complex containing only eIF2 and eIF3 binds directly to the initiation codon as a result of specific interaction of the IRES and the 40S subunit.
R-HSA-72764	Eukaryotic Translation Termination	The arrival of any of the three stop codons (UAA, UAG and UGA) into the ribosomal A-site triggers the binding of a release factor (RF) to the ribosome and subsequent polypeptide chain release. In eukaryotes, the RF is composed of two proteins, eRF1 and eRF3. eRF1 is responsible for the hydrolysis of the peptidyl-tRNA, while eRF3 provides a GTP-dependent function. The ribosome releases the mRNA and dissociates into its two complex subunits, which can reassemble on another molecule to begin a new round of protein synthesis. It should be noted that at present, there is no factor identified in eukaryotes that would be the functional equivalent of the bacterial ribosome release (or recycling) factor, RRF, that catalyzes dissociation of the ribosome from the mRNA following release of the polypeptide
R-HSA-168274	Export of Viral Ribonucleoproteins from Nucleus	Influenza genomic RNA (vRNA), synthesized in the nucleus of the infected host cell, is packaged into ribonucleoprotein (RNP) complexes containing viral polymerase proteins and NP (nucleocapsid). NP trimers bind the sugar phosphate backbone of the vRNA. As influenza viral RNP complexes are too large for passive diffusion out of the nucleus, utilization of the cellular nuclear export machinery is achieved by viral adaptor proteins. Matrix protein (M1) is critical for export of the complex from the nucleus, mediating the interaction of the RNP complex with the viral NEP/NS2 protein, which in turn interacts with host cell CRM1/exportin-1 nuclear export protein (Martin, 1991; O'Neill, 1998; Neumann et al., 2000; Elton, 2001; Cros, 2003; Ye, 2006; reviewed in Boulo, 2006).
R-HSA-180786	Extension of Telomeres	Telomerase acts as reverse transcriptase in the elongation of telomeres (Smogorzewska and de Lange 2004).
R-HSA-1474244	Extracellular matrix organization	The extracellular matrix is a component of all mammalian tissues, a network consisting largely of the fibrous proteins collagen, elastin and associated-microfibrils, fibronectin and laminins embedded in a viscoelastic gel of anionic proteoglycan polymers. It performs many functions in addition to its structural role; as a major component of the cellular microenvironment it influences cell behaviours such as proliferation, adhesion and migration, and regulates cell differentiation and death (Hynes 2009). <br><br>ECM composition is highly heterogeneous and dynamic, being constantly remodeled (Frantz et al. 2010) and modulated, largely by matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) and growth factors that bind to the ECM influencing the synthesis, crosslinking and degradation of ECM components (Hynes 2009). ECM remodeling is involved in the regulation of cell differentiation processes such as the establishment and maintenance of stem cell niches, branching morphogenesis, angiogenesis, bone remodeling, and wound repair. Redundant mechanisms modulate the expression and function of ECM modifying enzymes. Abnormal ECM dynamics can lead to deregulated cell proliferation and invasion, failure of cell death, and loss of cell differentiation, resulting in congenital defects and pathological processes including tissue fibrosis and cancer.<br><br>Collagen is the most abundant fibrous protein within the ECM constituting up to 30% of total protein in multicellular animals. Collagen provides tensile strength. It associates with elastic fibres, composed of elastin and fibrillin microfibrils, which give tissues the ability to recover after stretching. Other ECM proteins such as fibronectin, laminins, and matricellular proteins participate as connectors or linking proteins (Daley et al. 2008).<br><br>Chondroitin sulfate, dermatan sulfate and keratan sulfate proteoglycans are structural components associated with collagen fibrils (Scott & Haigh 1985; Scott & Orford 1981), serving to tether the fibril to the surrounding matrix. Decorin belongs to the small leucine-rich repeat proteoglycan family (SLRPs) which also includes biglycan, fibromodulin, lumican and asporin. All appear to be involved in collagen fibril formation and matrix assembly (Ameye & Young 2002). <br><br>ECM proteins such as osteonectin (SPARC), osteopontin and thrombospondins -1 and -2, collectively referred to as matricellular proteins (reviewed in Mosher & Adams 2012) appear to modulate cell-matrix interactions. In general they induce de-adhesion, characterized by disruption of focal adhesions and a reorganization of actin stress fibers (Bornstein 2009). Thrombospondin (TS)-1 and -2 bind MMP2. The resulting complex is endocytosed by the low-density lipoprotein receptor-related protein (LRP), clearing MMP2 from the ECM (Yang et al. 2001).<br><br>Osteopontin (SPP1, bone sialoprotein-1) interacts with collagen and fibronectin (Mukherjee et al. 1995). It also contains several cell adhesive domains that interact with integrins and CD44.<br><br>Aggrecan is the predominant ECM proteoglycan in cartilage (Hardingham & Fosang 1992). Its relatives include versican, neurocan and brevican (Iozzo 1998). In articular cartilage the major non-fibrous macromolecules are aggrecan, hyaluronan and hyaluronan and proteoglycan link protein 1 (HAPLN1). The high negative charge density of these molecules leads to the binding of large amounts of water (Bruckner 2006). Hyaluronan is bound by several large proteoglycans proteoglycans belonging to the hyalectan family that form high-molecular weight aggregates (Roughley 2006), accounting for the turgid nature of cartilage. <br><br>The most significant enzymes in ECM remodeling are the Matrix Metalloproteinase (MMP) and A disintegrin and metalloproteinase with thrombospondin motifs (ADAMTS) families (Cawston & Young 2010). Other notable ECM degrading enzymes include plasmin and cathepsin G. Many ECM proteinases are initially present as precursors, activated by proteolytic processing. MMP precursors include an amino prodomain which masks the catalytic Zn-binding motif (Page-McCawet al. 2007). This can be removed by other proteinases, often other MMPs. ECM proteinases can be inactivated by degradation, or blocked by inhibitors. Some of these inhibitors, including alpha2-macroglobulin, alpha1-proteinase inhibitor, and alpha1-chymotrypsin can inhibit a large variety of proteinases (Woessner & Nagase 2000). The tissue inhibitors of metalloproteinases (TIMPs) are potent MMP inhibitors (Brew & Nagase 2010).
R-HSA-140834	Extrinsic Pathway of Fibrin Clot Formation	Factor VII, the protease that initiates the normal blood clotting cascade, circulates in the blood in both its proenzyme (factor VII) and its activated (factor VIIa) forms. No clotting occurs, however, because neither form of the protein has any catalytic activity when free in solution. Blood clotting is normally initiated when tissue factor (TF), an intrinsic plasma membrane protein, is exposed to the blood by injury to the wall of a blood vessel. TF is then able to bind factor VIIa from plasma, and possibly also factor VII, to form complexes capable of catalyzing the conversion of factor X, from plasma, into its activated form, factor Xa. Factor Xa catalyzes the conversion of additional factor VII molecules to their activated form, increasing the amount of tissue factor:factor VIIa complex available at the site of injury, accelerating the generation of factor Xa, and allowing the activation of factor IXa as well. This process is self-limiting because as levels of factor Xa increase, tissue factor:factor VIIa complexes become trapped in the form of catalytically inactive heterotetramers with factor Xa and the protein TFPI (tissue pathway factor inhibitor). At this point the intinsic pathway, as an independent source of activated factor X, is thought to become critical for the continuation of clot formation (Broze 1995; Mann et al. 2003).<br>The nature of the initial tissue factor:factor VII complexes formed is controversial. One model, building on the observation that the complex of factor VII and TF has low but measurable proteolytic activity on factor X, suggests that this complex begins the activation of factor X, and that as factor VIIa accumulates, tissue factor:factor VIIa complexes also form, accelerating the process (Nemerson 1988). A second model, building on the observation that normal plasma contains low levels of activated factor VII constitutively, suggests that complexes with factor VIIa form immediately at the onset of clotting (Rapaport and Rao 1995). The two models are not mutually exclusive, and in any event, the central roles of tissue factor and factor VIIa in generating an initial supply of factors IXa and Xa, and the self-limiting nature of the process due to the action of TFPI, are all well-established.<br>These events are outlined in the drawing: black arrows connect the substrates (inputs) and products (outputs) of individual reactions, and blue lines connect output activated enzymes to the other reactions that they catalyze.
R-HSA-428790	Facilitative Na+-independent glucose transporters	Two gene families are responsible for glucose transport in humans. SLC2 (encoding GLUTs) and SLC5 (encoding SGLTs) families mediate glucose absorption in the small intestine, glucose reabsorption in the kidney, glucose uptake by the brain across the blood-brain barrier and glucose release by all cells in the body.<br><br>Glucose is the main energy source used by cells to make energy. Im mammals, blood glucose levels are tightly controlled and glucose is taken up from interstitial fluid by a passive, facilitative transport driven by the diffusion gradient of glucose (and other sugars) across the plasma membrane. This process is mediated by a family of Na+-independent, facilitative glucose transporters (GLUTs) encoded by the SLC2A gene family (Zhao FQ and Keating AF, 2007; Wood IS and Trayhurn P, 2003). There are 14 members belonging to this family (GLUT1-12, 14 and HMIT (H+/myo-inositol symporter)). The GLUT family can be subdivided into three subclasses (I-III) based on sequence similarity and characteristic sequence motifs (Joost HG and Thorens B, 2001).
R-HSA-983231	Factors involved in megakaryocyte development and platelet production	Megakaryocytes (MKs) give rise to circulating platelets (thrombocytes) through terminal differentiation of MKs which release cytoplasmic fragments as circulating platelets. As MKs mature they undergo endoreduplication (polyploidisation) and expansion of cytoplasmic mass to cell sizes larger than 50-100 microns, and ploidy ranges up to 128 N. As MK's mature, the polyploid nucleus becomes horseshoe-shaped, the cytoplasm expands, and platelet organelles and the demarcation membrane system are amplified. Proplatelet projections form which give rise to de novo circulating platelets (Deutsch & Tomer 2006). <br>The processes of megakaryocytopoiesis and platelet production occur within a complex microenvironment where chemokines, cytokines and adhesive interactions play major roles (Avecilla et al. 2004). Megakaryocytopoiesis is regulated at several levels including proliferation, differentiation and platelet release (Kaushansky 2003). Thrombopoietin (TPO/c-Mpl ligand) is the most potent cytokine stimulating proliferation and maturation of MK progenitors (Kaushansky 2005) but many other growth factors are involved. MK development is controlled by the action of multiple Transcriptin Factors, many MK-specific genes are co-regulated by GATA and friend of GATA (FOG), RUNX1 and ETS proteins. Nuclear factor erythroid 2 (NF-E2) which has an MK-erythroid specific 45-kDa subunit controls terminal MK maturation, proplatelet formation and platelet release (Schulze & Shivdasani 2004). NF-E2 deficient mice have profound thrombocytopenia (Shiraga et al. 1999). c-myb functions with p300 as a negative regulator of thrombopoiesis (Metcalf et al. 2005). During MK maturation, internal membrane systems, granules and organelles are assembled. Cytoplasmic fragmentation requires changes in the MK cytoskeleton and formation of organelles and channels. Individual organelles migrate from the cell body to the proplatelet ends, with approximately 30 percent of organelles/granules in motion at any given time (Richardson et al. 2005).
R-HSA-6783310	Fanconi Anemia Pathway	Fanconi anemia (FA) is a genetic disease of genome instability characterized by congenital skeletal defects, aplastic anemia, susceptibility to leukemias, and cellular sensitivity to DNA damaging agents. Patients with FA have been categorized into at least 15 complementation groups (FA-A, -B, -C, -D1, -D2, -E, -F, -G, -I, -J, -L, -M, -N, -O and -P). These complementation groups correspond to the genes FANCA, FANCB, FANCC, FANCD1/BRCA2, FANCD2, FANCE, FANCF, FANCG, FANCJ/BRIP1, FANCL, FANCM, FANCN/PALB2, FANCO/RAD51C and FANCP/SLX4. Eight of these proteins, FANCA, FANCB, FANCC, FANCE, FANCF, FANCG, FANCL, and FANCM, together with FAAP24, FAAP100, FAAP20, APITD1 and STRA13, form a nuclear complex termed the FA core complex. The FA core complex is an E3 ubiquitin ligase that recognizes and is activated by DNA damage in the form of interstrand crosslinks (ICLs), triggering monoubiquitination of FANCD2 and FANCI, which initiates repair of ICL-DNA.<p>FANCD2 and FANCI form a complex and are mutually dependent on one another for their respective monoubiquitination. After DNA damage and during S phase, FANCD2 localizes to discrete nuclear foci that colocalize with proteins involved in homologous recombination repair, such as BRCA1 and RAD51. The FA pathway is regulated by ubiquitination and phosphorylation of FANCD2 and FANCI. ATR-dependent phosphorylation of FANCI and FANCD2 promotes monoubiquitination of FANCD2, stimulating the FA pathway (Cohn and D'Andrea 2008, Wang 2007). The complex of USP1 and ZBTB32 (UAF1) is responsible for deubiquitination of FANCD2 and negatively regulates the FA pathway (Cohn et al. 2007). <p>Monoubiquitinated FANCD2 recruits DNA nucleases, including SLX4 (FANCP) and FAN1, which unhook the ICL from one of the two covalently linked DNA strands. The DNA polymerase nu (POLN) performs translesion DNA synthesis using the DNA strand with unhooked ICL as a template, thereby bypassing the unhooked ICL. The unhooked ICL is subsequently removed from the DNA via nucleotide excision repair (NER). Incision of the stalled replication fork during the unhooking step generates a double strand break (DSB). The DSB is repaired via homologous recombination repair (HRR) and involves the FA genes BRCA2 (FANCD1), PALB2 (FANCN) and BRIP1 (FANCJ) (reviewed by Deans and West 2011, Kottemann and Smogorzewska 2013). Homozygous mutations in BRCA2, PALB2 or BRIP1 result in Fanconi anemia, while heterozygous mutations in these genes predispose carriers to primarily breast and ovarian cancer. Well established functions of BRCA2, PALB2 and BRIP1 in DNA repair are BRCA1 dependent, but it is not yet clear whether there are additional roles for these proteins in the Fanconi anemia pathway that do not rely on BRCA1 (Evans and Longo 2014, Jiang and Greenberg 2015). Heterozygous BRCA1 mutations predispose carriers to breast and ovarian cancer with high penetrance. Complete loss of BRCA1 function is embryonic lethal. It has only recently been reported that a partial germline loss of BRCA1 function via mutations that diminish protein binding ability of the BRCT domain of BRCA1 result in a FA-like syndrome. BRCA1 has therefore been designated as the FANCS gene (Jiang and Greenberg 2015).<p>The FA pathway is involved in repairing DNA ICLs that arise by exposure to endogenous mutagens produced as by-products of normal cellular metabolism, such as aldehyde containing compounds. Disruption of the aldehyde dehydrogenase gene ALDH2 in FANCD2 deficient mice leads to severe developmental defects, early lethality and predisposition to leukemia. In addition to this, the double knockout mice are exceptionally sensitive to ethanol consumption, as ethanol metabolism results in accumulated levels of aldehydes (Langevin et al. 2011). 
R-HSA-75157	FasL/ CD95L signaling	The Fas family of cell surface receptors initiate the apototic pathway through interaction with the external ligand, FasL. The cytoplasmic domain of Fas interacts with a number of molecules in the transduction of the external signal to the cytoplasmic side of the cell membrane. The most notable cytoplasmic domain is the Death Domain (DD) that is involved in recruiting the FAS-associating death domain-containing protein (FADD). This interaction drives downstream events.
R-HSA-535734	Fatty acid, triacylglycerol, and ketone body metabolism	The reactions involved in the metabolism of fatty acids and of the triacylglycerols and ketone bodies derived from them form a closely interrelated, coordinately regulated module that plays a central role in human energy metabolism.
R-HSA-211935	Fatty acids	The CYP4 family are the main CYPs involved in the metabolism of long-chain fatty acids.
R-HSA-434316	Fatty Acids bound to GPR40 (FFAR1) regulate insulin secretion	Fatty acids augment the glucose triggered secretion of insulin through two mechanisms: intracellular metabolism and activation of FFAR1 (GPR40), a G-protein coupled receptor. Based on studies with inhibitors of G proteins such as pertussis toxin FFAR1 is believed to signal through Gq/11. Binding of free fatty acids by FFAR1 activates the heterotrimeric Gq complex which then activates Phospholipase C, producing inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate and eventually causing the release of intracellular calcium into the cytosol. From experiments in knockout mice it is estimated that signaling through FFAR1 is responsible for about 50% of the augmentation of insulin secretion produced by free fatty acids.
R-HSA-75105	Fatty Acyl-CoA Biosynthesis	Fatty acyl-CoA biosynthesis involves following steps:<BR> -Palmitate synthesis catalyzed by Acetyl-CoA carboxylase and Fatty acid synthase<BR>-Conversion of palmitic acid to long chain fatty acids and<BR>-Conversion of long chain fatty acids to fatty acyl-CoA by acyl-CoA synthases.<BR>
R-HSA-2644605	FBXW7 Mutants and NOTCH1 in Cancer	FBXW7 (FBW7) is a component of the SCF (SKP1, CUL1, and F-box protein) ubiquitin ligase complex SCF-FBW7 which is involved in the degradation of NOTCH1 (Oberg et al. 2001, Wu et al. 2001, Fryer et al. 2004). Loss of function mutations in FBXW7 are frequently found in T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia (Akhoondi et al. 2007, Thompson et al. 2007, O'Neil et al. 2007) and are mutually exclusive with NOTCH1 PEST domain mutations (Thompson et al. 2007, O'Neil et al. 2007).
R-HSA-2454202	Fc epsilon receptor (FCERI) signaling	Mast cells (MC) are distributed in tissues throughout the human body and have long been recognized as key cells of type I hypersensitivity reactions. They also play important roles in inflammatory and immediate allergic reactions. Activation through FCERI-bound antigen-specific IgE causes release of potent inflammatory mediators, such as histamine, proteases, chemotactic factors, cytokines and metabolites of arachidonic acid that act on the vasculature, smooth muscle, connective tissue, mucous glands and inflammatory cells (Borish & Joseph 1992, Amin 2012, Metcalfe et al. 1993). FCERI is a multimeric cell-surface receptor that binds the Fc fragment of IgE with high affinity. On mast cells and basophils FCERI exists as a tetrameric complex consisting of one alpha-chain, one beta-chain, and two disulfide-bonded gamma-chains, and on dendritic cells, Langerhans cells, macrophages, and eosinophils it exists as a trimeric complex with one alpha-chain and two disulfide-bonded gamma-chains (Wu 2011, Kraft & Kinet 2007). FCERI signaling in mast cells includes a network of signaling molecules and adaptor proteins. These molecules coordinate ultimately leading to effects on degranulation, eicosanoid production, and cytokine and chemokine production and cell migration and adhesion, growth and survival.<br>The first step in FCERI signaling is the phosphorylation of the tyrosine residues in the ITAM of both the beta and the gamma subunits of the FCERI by LYN, which is bound to the FCERI beta-chain. The phosphorylated ITAM then recruits the protein tyrosine kinase SYK (spleen tyrosine kinase) which then phosphorylates the adaptor protein LAT. Phosphorylated LAT (linker for activation of T cells) acts as a scaffolding protein and recruits other cytosolic adaptor molecules GRB2 (growth-factor-receptor-bound protein 2), GADS (GRB2-related adaptor protein), SHC (SRC homology 2 (SH2)-domain-containing transforming protein C) and SLP76 (SH2-domain-containing leukocyte protein of 76 kDa), as well as the exchange factors and adaptor molecules VAV and SOS (son of sevenless homologue), and the signalling enzyme phospholipase C gamma1 (PLC-gamma1). Tyrosoine phosphorylation of enzymes and adaptors, including VAV, SHC GRB2 and SOS stimulate small GTPases such as RAC, RAS and RAF. These pathways lead to activation of the ERK, JNK and p38 MAP kinases, histamine release and cytokine production. FCERI activation also triggers the phosphorylation of PLC-gamma which upon membrane localisation hydrolyse PIP2 to form IP3 and 1,2-diacylglycerol (DAG) - second messengers that release Ca2+ from internal stores and activate PKC, respectively. Degranulation or histamine release follows the activation of PLC-gamma and protein kinase C (PKC) and the increased mobilization of calcium (Ca2+). Receptor aggregation also results in the phosphorylation of adaptor protein NTAL/LAT2 which then recruits GAB2. PI3K associates with phosphorylated GAB2 and catalyses the formation of PIP3 in the membrane, which attracts many PH domain proteins like BTK, PLC-gamma, AKT and PDK. PI3K mediated activation of AKT then regulate the mast cell proliferation, development and survival (Gu et al. 2001).
R-HSA-2871809	FCERI mediated Ca+2 mobilization	Increase of intracellular calcium in mast cells is most crucial for mast cell degranulation. Elevation of intracellular calcium is achieved by activation of PLC-gamma. Mast cells express both PLC-gamma1 and PLC-gamma2 isoforms and activation of these enzymes leads to conversion of phosphatidylinositol 4,5-bisphosphate (PIP2) into inositol triphosphate (IP3) and diacylglycerol (DAG). The production of IP3 leads to mobilization of intracellular Ca+2, which later results in a sustained Ca+2 flux response that is maintained by an influx of extracellular Ca+2. In addition to degranulation, an increase in intracellular calcium concentration also activates the Ca2+/calmodulin-dependent serine phosphatase calcineurin. Calcineurin dephosphorylates the nuclear factor for T cell activation (NFAT) which exposes nuclear-localization signal sequence triggering translocation of the dephosphorylated NFAT-CaN complex to the nucleus. Once in the nucleus, NFAT regulates the transcription of several cytokine genes (Kambayashi et al. 2007, Hoth & Penner 1992, Ebinu et al. 2000, Siraganian et al).
R-HSA-2871796	FCERI mediated MAPK activation	Formation of the LAT signaling complex leads to activation of MAPK and production of cytokines. The sequence of events that leads from LAT to cytokine production has not been as clearly defined as the sequence that leads to degranulation. However, the pathways that lead to cytokine production require the guanine-nucleotide-exchange factors SOS and VAV that regulate GDP-GTP exchange of RAS. After its activation, RAS positively regulates the RAF-dependent pathway that leads to phosphorylation and, in part, activation of the mitogen-activated protein kinases (MAPKs) extracellular-signal-regulated kinase 1 (ERK1) and ERK2 (Gilfillan & Tkaczyk 2006).
R-HSA-2871837	FCERI mediated NF-kB activation	The increase in intracellular Ca+2 in conjunction with DAG also activates PKC and RasGRP, which inturn contributes to cytokine production by mast cells (Kambayashi et al. 2007). Activation of the FCERI engages CARMA1, BCL10 and MALT1 complex to activate NF-kB through PKC-theta (Klemm et al. 2006, Chen et al. 2007). FCERI stimulation leads to phosphorylation, and degradation of IkB which allows the release and nuclear translocation of the NF-kB proteins. Activation of the NF-kB transcription factors then results in the synthesis of several cytokines. NF-kB activation by FCERI is critical for proinflammatory cytokine production during mast cell activation and is crucial for allergic inflammatory diseases (Klemm et al. 2006).
R-HSA-2029480	Fcgamma receptor (FCGR) dependent phagocytosis	Phagocytosis is one of the important innate immune responses that function to eliminate invading infectious agents. Monocytes, macrophages, and neutrophils are the professional phagocytic cells. Phagocytosis is a complex process involving the recognition of invading foreign particles by specific types of phagocytic receptors and the subsequent internalization of the particles. Fc gamma receptors (FCGRs) are among the best studied phagocytic receptors that bind to Fc portion of immunoglobulin G (IgG). Through their antigen binding F(ab) end, antibodies bind to specific antigen while their constant (Fc) region binds to FCGRs on phagocytes. The clustering of FCGRs by IgG antibodies on the phagocyte initiates a variety of signals, which lead, through the reorganisation of actin cytoskeleton and membrane remodelling, to the formation of pseudopod and phagosome. Fc gamma receptors are classified into three classes: FCGRI, FCGRII and FCGRIII. Each class of these FCGRs consists of several individual isoforms. Among all these isoforms FCGRI, FCGRIIA and FCGRIIIA, are able to mediate phagocytosis (Joshi et al. 2006, Garcia Garcia & Rosales 2002, Nimmerjahn & Ravetch 2006).
R-HSA-2029481	FCGR activation	Cross-linking of FCGRs with IgG coated immune complexes results in tyrosine phosphorylation of the immuno tyrosine activation motif (ITAMs) of the rececptor by membrane-bound tyrosine kinases of the SRC family. The phosphorylated ITAM tyrosines serve as docking sites for Src homology 2 (SH2) domain-containing SYK kinase. Recruitment and activation of SYK is critical for FCGR-mediated signaling in phagocytosis, but the exact role of SYK in this process is unclear. Activated SYK then transmits downstream signals leading to actin polymerization and particle internalization.
R-HSA-197529	Feedback control in the MAPK signaling module	The RAF/MEK/ERK network topology underlies ERK dynamics, which is believed to be a major cause of the diversity in cellular response to stimulation of different growth factor receptors. Topological differences exist in such networks, dependent on whether cells are activated with EGF or NGF. On EGF stimulation, the network exhibits negative feedback only whereas a positive feedback is apparent on NGF stimulation. The latter confers stability to ERK activation, thereby governing differentiation (in PC12 cells) upon stimulation with NGF, but not EGF (Santos S.D. et al, 2007). The negative feedback observed on EGF stimulation controls the transient activation of ERK1/2, and is mediated by ERK1/2 down regulation of SOS. The positive feedback observed on NGF stimulation involves PKC, mainly PKC-delta, which acts upstream of the MAPK module, the RAF kinase inhibitory protein RKIP, and ERK, which phosphorylates RAF, increasing its activity.
R-HSA-1187000	Fertilization	Mammalian fertilization comprises sperm migration through the female reproductive tract, biochemical and morphological changes to sperm, and sperm-egg interaction in the oviduct. Although the broad concepts of fertilization are well defined, our understanding of the biochemical mechanisms underlying sperm-egg binding is limited.
R-HSA-190242	FGFR1 ligand binding and activation	The vertebrate fibroblast growth factor receptor 1 (FGFR1) is alternatively spliced generating multiple variants that are differentially expressed during embryo development and in the adult body. The restricted expression patterns of FGFR1 isoforms, together with differential expression and binding of specific ligands, leads to activation of common FGFR1 signal transduction pathways, but may result in distinctively different biological responses as a result of differences in cellular context. FGFR1 isoforms are also present in the nucleus in complex with various fibroblast growth factors where they function to regulate transcription of target genes. <br><br>FGFR is probably activated by NCAM very differently from the way by which it is activated by FGFs, reflecting the different conditions for NCAM-FGFR and FGF-FGFR interactions. The affinity of FGF for FGFR is approximately 10e6 times higher than that of NCAM for FGFR. Moreover, in the brain NCAM is constantly present on the cell surface at a much higher (micromolar) concentration than FGFs, which only appear transiently in the extracellular environment in the nanomolar range.
R-HSA-1839124	FGFR1 mutant receptor activation	The FGFR1 gene has been shown to be subject to activating mutations, chromosomal rearrangements and gene amplification leading to a variety of proliferative and developmental disorders depending on whether these events occur in the germline or arise somatically (reviewed in Webster and Donoghue, 1997; Burke, 1998; Cunningham, 2007; Wesche, 2011; Greulich and Pollock, 2011). Many of the resulting mutant FGFR1 proteins can dimerize and promote signaling in a ligand-independent fashion, although signal transduction may still be amplified in the presence of ligand (reviewed in Turner and Gross, 2010; Greulich and Pollock, 2011; Wesche et al, 2011). 
R-HSA-190370	FGFR1b ligand binding and activation	This pathway depicts the binding of an experimentally-verified range of ligands to FGFR1b. While binding affinities may vary considerably within this set, the ligands listed have been established to bring about receptor activation at their reported physiological concentrations.
R-HSA-190374	FGFR1c and Klotho ligand binding and activation	FGF23 is a member of the endocrine subfamily of FGFs. It is produced in bone tissue and regulates kidney functions. Klotho is essential for endogenous FGF23 function as it converts FGFR1c into a specific FGF23 receptor.
R-HSA-190373	FGFR1c ligand binding and activation	This pathway depicts the binding of an experimentally-verified range of ligands to FGFR1c. While binding affinities may vary considerably within this set, the ligands listed have been established to bring about receptor activation at their reported physiological concentrations.
R-HSA-190241	FGFR2 ligand binding and activation	Dominant mutations in the fibroblast growth factor receptor 2 (FGFR2) gene have been identified as causes of four phenotypically distinct craniosynostosis syndromes, including Crouzon, Jackson- Weiss, Pfeiffer, and Apert syndromes. FGFR2 binds a number of different FGFs preferentially, as illustrated in this pathway.<br><br>FGFR is probably activated by NCAM very differently from the way by which it is activated by FGFs, reflecting the different conditions for NCAM-FGFR and FGF-FGFR interactions. The affinity of FGF for FGFR is approximately 10e6 times higher than that of NCAM for FGFR. Moreover, in the brain NCAM is constantly present on the cell surface at a much higher (micromolar) concentration than FGFs, which only appear transiently in the extracellular environment in the nanomolar range.
R-HSA-1839126	FGFR2 mutant receptor activation	Autosomal dominant mutations in FGFR2 are associated with the development of a range of skeletal disorders including Beare-Stevensen cutis gyrata syndrome, Pfeiffer syndrome, Jackson-Weiss syndrome, Crouzon syndrome and Apert Syndrome (reveiwed in Burke, 1998; Webster and Donoghue 1997; Cunningham, 2007). Activating point mutations have also been identified in FGFR2 in ~15% of endometrial cancers, as well as to a lesser extent in ovarian and gastric cancers (Dutt, 2008; Pollock, 2007; Byron, 2010; Jang, 2001). Activating mutations in FGFR2 are thought to contribute to receptor activation through diverse mechanisms, including constitutive ligand-independent dimerization (Robertson, 1998), expanded range and affinity for ligand (Ibrahimi, 2004b; Yu, 2000) and enhanced kinase activity (Byron, 2008; Chen, 2007). FGFR2 amplifications have been identified in 10% of gastric cancers, where they are associated with poor prognosis diffuse cancers (Hattori, 1996; Ueda, 1999; Shin, 2000; Kunii, 2008) , and in ~1% of breast cancers (Turner, 2010; Tannheimer, 2000). FGFR2 amplification often occur in conjunction with deletions of C-terminal exons, resulting in expression of a internalization- and degradation-resistant form of the receptor (Takeda, 2007; Cha, 2008, 2009). Signaling through overexpressed FGFR2 shows evidence of being ligand-independent and sensitive to FGFR inhibitors (Lorenzi, 1997; Takeda, 2007; Cha, 2009).
R-HSA-190377	FGFR2b ligand binding and activation	This pathway depicts the binding of an experimentally-verified range of ligands to FGFR2b. While binding affinities may vary considerably within this set, the ligands listed have been established to bring about receptor activation at their reported physiological concentrations.
R-HSA-190375	FGFR2c ligand binding and activation	This pathway depicts the binding of an experimentally-verified range of ligands to FGFR2c. While binding affinities may vary considerably within this set, the ligands listed have been established to bring about receptor activation at their reported physiological concentrations.
R-HSA-190239	FGFR3 ligand binding and activation	FGFR3 is a receptor tyrosine kinase of the FGF receptor family, known to have a negative regulatory effect on long bone growth. Somatically, some of the same activating mutations are associated with hypochondroplasia, multiple myeloma, and cervical and vesical carcinoma.
R-HSA-2033514	FGFR3 mutant receptor activation	The FGFR3 gene has been shown to be subject to activating mutations and gene amplification leading to a variety of proliferative and developmental disorders depending on whether these events occur in the germline or arise somatically. As is the case for the other receptors, many of the activating mutations that are seen in FGFR3-related cancers mimic the germline FGFR3 mutations that give rise to autosomal skeletal disorders and include both ligand-dependent and independent mechanisms (reviewed in Webster and Donoghue, 1997; Burke et al, 1998; Wesche et al, 2011). In addition to activating mutations, the FGFR3 gene is subject to a translocation event in 15% of multiple myelomas (Avet-Loiseau et al, 1998; Chesi et al, 1997). This chromosomal rearrangement puts the FGFR3 gene under the control of the highly active IGH promoter and promotes overexpression and constitutive activation of FGFR3 (Otsuki et al, 1999). In a small proportion of multiple myelomas, the translocation event is accompanied by activating mutations in the FGFR3 coding sequence (Chesi et al, 1997; Onwuazor et al, 2003; Ronchetti et al, 2001). 
R-HSA-190371	FGFR3b ligand binding and activation	This pathway depicts the binding of an experimentally-verified range of ligands to FGFR3b. While binding affinities may vary considerably within this set, the ligands listed have been established to bring about receptor activation at their reported physiological concentrations.
R-HSA-190372	FGFR3c ligand binding and activation	This pathway depicts the binding of an experimentally-verified range of ligands to FGFR3c. While binding affinities may vary considerably within this set, the ligands listed have been established to bring about receptor activation at their reported physiological concentrations.
R-HSA-190322	FGFR4 ligand binding and activation	FGFR4 is expressed mainly in mature skeletal muscle, and disruption of FGFR4 signaling interrupts limb muscle formation in vertebrates.
R-HSA-1839128	FGFR4 mutant receptor activation	FGFR4 is perhaps the least well studied of the FGF receptors, and unlike the case for the other FGFR genes, mutations in FGFR4 are not known to be associated with any developmental disorders. Recently, however, somatically arising mutations in the FGFR4 coding sequence have begun to be identified in some cancers. (Taylor, 2009; Ruhe, 2007; Roidl, 2010). The resulting mutant versions of FGFR4 promote aberrant signaling through ligand-independent dimerization and enhanced autophosphorylation, among other mechanisms (Roidl, 2009; Taylor, 2009).
R-HSA-1566977	Fibronectin matrix formation	Fibronectin (FN1) is found in the extracellular matrix (ECM) of all cells as linear and branched networks that surround and connect neighbouring cells (Singh et al. 2010). Prior to matrix formation FN1 exists as a protein dimer. Often the two peptide chains represent differentially-spliced variants. The chains are linked by a pair of C-terminal disulfide bonds which are essential for subsequent multimerization (Schwarzbaur 1991). FN1 monomers have a molecular weight of 230-270 kDa depending on alternative splicing and contain three types of repeating unit, I, II, and III. I and II are stabilized by intra-chain disulfide bonds. The absence of disulfide bonds in type III modules allows them to partially unfold under applied force (Erickson 2002). Three regions of variable splicing occur along the length of the FN1 monomer (Mao & Schwarzbauer 2005). One or both of the 'extra' type III modules EIIIA and EIIIB may be present in cellular FN1, but never in plasma FN1. A variable (V) region exists between the 14th and 15th type III module. This contains the binding site for alpha4 beta1 and alpha4beta7 integrins. It is present in most cellular FN1, occasionally in plasma FN1. The modules are arranged into several functional and protein-binding domains. There are four FN1-binding domains (Mao & Schwarzbauer 2005). One of these domains (I1-5), referred to as the 'assembly domain', is required for the initiation of FN1 matrix assembly. Modules III9-10 correspond to the 'cell-binding domain' of FN1. The Arg-Gly-Asp (RGD) integrin binding sequence located in III10 is the primary site of FN1 to cell attachment, mediated predominantly by alpha5 beta1 and alphaV beta3 integrins. The 'synergy site' in III9 modulates FN1's association with alpha5 beta1 integrins. FN1 also contains interaction domains for fibrin (I1-5, I10-12), collagen (I6-9, II1-2), fibulin-1 (III13-14), heparin, syndecan (III12-14) and fibrillin-1 (I6-9) (Mao & Schwartzbauer 2005, Sabatier et al. 2009).<br><br> FN1 dimer binding to alpha5beta1 integrin stimulates self-association. Binding is thought to lead to a conformational change in FN1 that triggers the addition of further FN1 dimers (Singh et al. 2010). I1-5 functions as a unit that is the primary FN1 matrix assembly domain (Sottile et al. 1991) but other units are likely to be involved (Singh et al. 2010), the process is not fully understood.<br><br>Several ECM proteins appear to require the FN1 matrix for their own assembly. Fibrillin-1 containing microfibrils are formed when fibrillin-1 multimers bind to the FN1 matrix (Sabatier et al. 2009). FN1 polymerization promotes the deposition of type I and type III collagen (Sottile and Hocking 2002, Velling et al. 2002). Inhibition of FN1 polymerization increases its turnover and a concomitant loss of collagen types I and III from the ECM (Sottile and Hocking 2002, Sottile et al. 2007). FN1 is regulated by matrix metalloproteinases, particularly MMP14 (Shi & Sottile 2011).
R-HSA-2855086	Ficolins bind to repetitive carbohydrate structures on the target cell surface	Ficolins are recognition molecules in the lectin complement pathway. Three types of ficolins have been identified in humans: M-ficolin (ficolin-1, FCN1), L-ficolin (ficolin-2, FCN2) and H-ficolin (ficolin-3, FCN3). Ficolin-2 and -3 are circulating in blood whereas ficolin-1 is locally secreted out of the immune response cells (Teh C et al. 2000; Liu Y et al. 2005; Matsushita M et al. 2002). Serum ficolins circulate in complexes with MBL-associated serine proteases (MASPs). Upon binding of ficolins to carbohydrates on the target cell surface, MASPs are converted to active forms, and subsequently activate the complement cascade (Matsushita M et al. 2002; Gout E et al 2009). Ficolins function as oligomers of structural subunits. Each subunit is composed of three identical 35kDa peptides. The ficolin peptide sequence contains an amino-terminal cysteine-rich region, a collagen-like domain, a neck region and a carboxy-terminal fibrinogen-like domain. The fibrinogen-like domain of ficolins bind to pathogen- or apoptotic cell-associated molecular patterns. Different ficolins have distinct recognition specificities (Endo Y et al. 2007; Thiel S and Gadjeva M 2009; Garlatti V et al. 2010). 
R-HSA-217271	FMO oxidises nucleophiles	Flavin-containing monooxygenases (FMOs) are the second family of microsomal oxidative enzymes with broad and overlapping specificity. The major reactions FMOs catalyze are nucleophilic hetero-atom compounds such as nitrogen, sulfur or phosphorus as the hetero-atom to form N-oxides, S-oxides or P-oxides respectively. Despite the functional overlap with cytochrome P450s, the mechanism of action differs. FMOs bind and activate molecular oxygen before the substrate binds to the enzyme (picture). They also require flavin adenosine dinucleotide (FAD) as a cofactor. Unlike cytochrome P450 enzymes, FMOs are heat-labile, a useful way to distinguish which enzyme system is at work for researchers studying metabolism. Also, FMOs are not inducible by substrates, unlike the P450 enzymes.\n<font color=red>(1)</font> NADPH binds to the enzyme and reduces the prosthetic group FAD to FADH<sub>2</sub>. NADP<sup>+</sup> remains bound to the enzyme.\n<font color=red>(2)</font> Incorporation of molecular oxygen to form a hydroperoxide.\n<font color=red>(3)</font> A peroxide oxygen is transferred to the substrate.\n<font color=red>(4)</font> Water is released.\n<font color=red>(5)</font> NADP<sup>+</sup> dissociates returning the enzyme to its initial state.\n\nTo date, there are 6 isozymes of FMO (FMO1-6) in humans, the most prominent and active one being FMO3. The FMO6 gene does not encode for a functional enzyme although it has the greatest sequence similarity with FMO3 (71%), whilst the others range from 50-58% sequence similarity with FMO3. FMO1-3 are the ones that exhibit activity towards nucleophiles, the others are insignificant in this respect (Cashman 2003, Krueger & Williams 2005).
R-HSA-390450	Folding of actin by CCT/TriC	Nucleotide-independent transfer of beta-actin from prefoldin to CCT occurs when prefoldin binds to CCT (Vainberg et al., 1998). Following ATP- dependent folding within CCT (Gao et al., 1992), beta-actin is released as a soluble, monomeric protein.
R-HSA-72689	Formation of a pool of free 40S subunits	The 80S ribosome dissociates into free 40S (small) and 60S (large) ribosomal subunits. Each ribosomal subunit is constituted by several individual ribosomal proteins and rRNA.
R-HSA-196025	Formation of annular gap junctions	Gap junction plaque internalization and the disruption cell communication requires a reorganization of Cx molecular interactions. Proteins including Dab-2, AP-2, Dynamin and Myosin VI associate with gap junction plaques permitting the internalisation of plaques after clathrin association (Piehl et al., 2007).
R-HSA-196025	Formation of annular gap junctions	Until now, two kinds of annular gap junctions have been described. The first is a small vesicle like structure which permits gap junction plaque renewal without arrest of functionality [Jordan et al., 2001]. The second is a large annular structure, composed primarily of the junctional plaques of two adjacent cells (Jordan et al., 2001; Segretain et al., 2004).
R-HSA-111458	Formation of apoptosome	Cytoplasmic cytochrome c binds to apoptotic protease activating factor-1 (Apaf-1) promoting the formation of an Apaf-1 oligomer (the apoptosome) which in turn binds and activates caspase-9.
R-HSA-163210	Formation of ATP by chemiosmotic coupling	The re-entry of protons into the mitochondrial matrix through Complex V causes conformational changes which result in ATP synthesis. Complex V (ATP synthase) is composed of 3 parts; an F1 catalytic core (approx 5 subunits), an F0 membrane proton channel (approx 9 subunits) and two stalks linking F1 to F0. F1 contains three alpha subunits, three beta subunits, and one each of gamma, delta, and epsilon subunits. Each beta subunit contains an active site for ATP synthesis. F0 has at least 9 subunits (a-g, A6L and F6), with one copy each of subunits b, d and F6.<br>The mechanism of ATP synthesis by Complex V was predicted by Boyer et al in 1973: ADP and Pi bind to the enzyme resulting in a conformational change. ATP is then synthesized, still bound to the enzyme. Another change in the active site results in the release of free ATP into the matrix. The overall reaction is:<br>ADP + Pi + H+ + nH+ (intermemb. space) = ATP + H2O + nH+ (matrix)
R-HSA-77042	Formation of editosomes by ADAR proteins	It is still unclear how ADAR 1 and ADAR 2 proteins form the editosomes with the target RNA. Other components of these editosomes for A to I editing are unknown. <BR>
R-HSA-140877	Formation of Fibrin Clot (Clotting Cascade)	The formation of a fibrin clot at the site of an injury to the wall of a normal blood vessel is an essential part of the process to stop blood loss after vascular injury. The reactions that lead to fibrin clot formation are commonly described as a cascade, in which the product of each step is an enzyme or cofactor needed for following reactions to proceed efficiently. The entire clotting cascade can be divided into three portions, the extrinsic pathway, the intrinsic pathway, and the common pathway. The extrinsic pathway begins with the release of tissue factor at the site of vascular injury and leads to the activation of factor X. The intrinsic pathway provides an alternative mechanism for activation of factor X, starting from the activation of factor XII. The common pathway consists of the steps linking the activation of factor X to the formation of a multimeric, cross-linked fibrin clot. Each of these pathways includes not only a cascade of events that generate the catalytic activities needed for clot formation, but also numerous positive and negative regulatory events.
R-HSA-167200	Formation of HIV-1 elongation complex containing HIV-1 Tat	This HIV-1 event was inferred from the corresponding human RNA Poll II transcription event in Reactome. The details relevant to HIV-1 are described below. For a more detailed description of the general mechanism, see the link to the corresponding RNA Pol II transcription event below. The formation of the HIV-1 elongation complex involves Tat mediated recruitment of P-TEFb(Cyclin T1:Cdk9) to the TAR sequence (Wei et al, 1998) and P-TEFb(Cyclin T1:Cdk9) mediated phosphorylation of the RNA Pol II CTD as well as the negative transcriptional elongation factors DSIF and NELF (Herrmann, 1995; Ivanov et al. 2000; Fujinaga et al. 2004; Zhou et al., 2004).
R-HSA-5696395	Formation of Incision Complex in GG-NER	After the XPC complex and the UV-DDB complex bind damaged DNA, a basal transcription factor TFIIH is recruited to the nucleotide excision repair (NER) site (Volker et al. 2001, Riedl et al. 2003). DNA helicases ERCC2 (XPD) and ERCC3 (XPB) are subunits of the TFIIH complex. ERCC2 unwinds the DNA around the damage in concert with the ATPase activity of ERCC3, creating an open bubble (Coin et al. 2007). Simultaneously, the presence of the damage is verified by XPA (Camenisch et al. 2006). The recruitment of XPA is partially regulated by PARP1 and/or PARP2 (King et al. 2012).<p>Two DNA endonucleases, ERCC5 (XPG) and the complex of ERCC1 and ERCC4 (XPF), are recruited to the open bubble structure to form the incision complex that will excise the damaged oligonucleotide from the affected DNA strand (Dunand-Sauthier et al. 2005, Zotter et al. 2006, Riedl et al. 2003, Tsodikov et al. 2007, Orelli et al. 2010). The RPA heterotrimer coats the undamaged DNA strand, thus protecting it from the endonucleolytic attack (De Laat et al. 1998).
R-HSA-112382	Formation of RNA Pol II elongation complex 	TFIIS is a transcription factor involved in different phases of transcription, occurring in a major ubiquitous form and other tissue specific forms. TFIIS stimulates RNA Pol II complex out of elongation arrest. <BR> Other transcription factors like ELL, Elongin family members and TFIIF interact directly with elongating Pol II and increase its elongation rate. These factors have been observed to act on naked DNA templates by suppressing transient pausing by the enzyme at all or most steps of nucleotide addition. In Drosophila, ELL is found at a large number of transcriptionally active sites on polytene chromosomes. In general, ELL is suspected to have more unidentified functions.<BR> Elongin is a heterotrimeric protein complex that stimulates the overall rate of elongation. In addition, Elongin may act as an E3 Ubiquitin ligase. Ubiquitylation of RNA Pol II occurs rapidly after genotoxic assault by UV light or chemicals, and results in degradation by proteasome. The FACT complex appears to promote elongation by facilitating passage of polymerase through chromatin.<BR> All these factors contribute to the formation of a processive elongation complex centered around the RNA Pol II complex positioned on the DNA:RNA hybrid. This enables the RNA Pol II elongation complex to function as a platform that coordinates mRNA processing and export (Reviewed by Shilatifard et al., 2003).
R-HSA-2559584	Formation of Senescence-Associated Heterochromatin Foci (SAHF)	The process of DNA damage/telomere stress induced senescence culminates in the formation of senescence associated heterochromatin foci (SAHF). These foci represent facultative heterochromatin that is formed in senescent cells. They contribute to the repression of proliferation promoting genes and play an important role in the permanent cell cycle exit that characterizes senescence (Narita et al. 2003 and 2006). SAHF appear as compacted, punctate DAPI stained foci of DNA. Each chromosome is condensed into a single SAH focus, with telomeric and centromeric chromatin located predominantly at its periphery (Funayama et al. 2006, Zhang et al. 2007).<p>An evolutionarily conserved protein complex of HIRA, ASF1A, UBN1 and CABIN1 plays a crucial role in the SAHF formation. As cells approach senescence, HIRA, ASF1A, UBN1 and CABIN1 accumulate at the PML bodies (Zhang et al. 2005, Banumathy et al. 2009, Rai et al. 2011). PML bodies are punctate nuclear structures that contain PML protein and numerous other proteins and are proposed to be the sites of assembly of macromolecular regulatory complexes and protein modification (Fogal et al. 2000, Guo et al. 2000, Pearson et al. 2000). Recruitment of HIRA to PML bodies coincides with altered chromatin structure and deposition of macroH2A histone H2A variant onto chromatin. As cells become senescent, HIRA, ASF1A, UBN1 and CABIN1 relocate from PML bodies to SAHF. HIRA accumulation at PML bodies is RB1 and TP53 independent, but may require phosphorylation of HIRA serine S697 by GSK3B (Ye, Zerlanko, Kennedy et al. 2007). SAHF formation itself, however, requires functional RB1 and TP53 pathways (Ye, Zerlanko, Zhang et al. 2007).<p>SAHF contain H3K9Me mark, characteristic of trancriptionally silent chromatin, and HP1, marcoH2A histone H2A variant and HMGA proteins are also components of SAHF (Narita et al. 2006), besides the HIRA:ASF1A:UBN1:CABIN1 complex. A yet unidentified H3K9Me histone methyltransferase may be recruited to SAHF by UBN1 (Banumathy et al. 2009). One of the functions of the HIRA:ASF1A:UBN1:CABIN1 complex is to deposit histone H3.3. variant to chromatin, which influences gene expression (Zhang et al. 2007, Rai et al. 2011).<p>Further studies are needed to fully elucidate the mechanism of SAHF formation and mechanism by which SAHF promote cell senescence.
R-HSA-6781823	Formation of TC-NER Pre-Incision Complex	Formation of TC-NER pre-incision complex is initiated when the RNA polymerase II (RNA Pol II) complex stalls at a DNA damage site. The stalling is caused by misincorporation of a ribonucleotide opposite to a damaged base (Brueckner et al. 2007). Cockayne syndrome protein B (ERCC6, CSB) binds stalled RNA Pol II and recruits Cockayne syndrome protein A (ERCC8, CSA). ERCC8 is part of an ubiquitin ligase complex that also contains DDB1, CUL4A or CUL4B and RBX1. This complex is implicated in the regulation of TC-NER progression probably by ubiquitinating one or more factors involved in this pathway, which may include RNA Pol II and ERCC6 at the later stages of repair (Bregman et al. 1996, Fousteri et al. 2006, Groisman et al. 2006). XPA is recruited to the TC-NER site through its interaction with the TFIIH complex (Furuta et al. 2002, Ziani et al. 2014). The XAB2 complex, which probably regulates the accessibility of the DNA damage site through its RNA-DNA helicase activity, binds the TC-NER site via the interaction of its XAB2 subunit with RNA Pol II, ERCC6, ERCC8 and XPA (Nakatsu et al. 2000, Sollier et al. 2014). TCEA1 (TFIIS) is a transcription elongation factor that may facilitate backtracking of the stalled RNA Pol II, enabling access of repair proteins to the DNA damage site and promotes partial digestion of the 3' protruding end of the nascent mRNA transcript by the backtracked RNA Pol II, allowing resumption of RNA synthesis after damage removal (Donahue et al. 1994). Access to DNA damage site is also facilitated by chromatin remodelers HMGN1 (recruited to the TC-NER site through RNA Pol II and ERCC8-dependent manner) and histone acetyltransferase p300 (EP300), recruited to the TC-NER site through ERCC6-dependent manner (Birger et al. 2003, Fousteri et al. 2006). UVSSA protein interacts with ubiquitinated ERCC6 and RNA Pol II, recruiting ubiquitin protease USP7 to the TC-NER site and promoting ERCC6 stabilization (Nakazawa et al. 2012, Schwertman et al. 2012, Zhang et al. 2012, Fei and Chen 2012).
R-HSA-173599	Formation of the active cofactor, UDP-glucuronate	Glucose 1-phosphate and UTP are the precursors to UDP-glucuronate formation. After oxidation of the resultant complex, UDP-glucuronate is transported to the ER lumen.
R-HSA-201722	Formation of the beta-catenin:TCF transactivating complex	Once in the nucleus, beta-catenin is recruited to WNT target genes through interaction with TCF/LEF transcription factors. This family, which consists of TCF7 (also known as TCF1), TCF7L1 (also known as TCF3), TCF7L2 (also known as TCF4) and TCF7L3 (also known as LEF1), are HMG-containing transcription factors that bind to the WNT responsive elements in target gene promoters (reviewed in Brantjes et al, 2002). In the absence of WNT signal, TCF/LEF proteins recruit Groucho/TLE repressors to inhibit transcription; upon WNT stimulation, beta-catenin can displace Groucho/TLE from TCF/LEF proteins to initiate transcriptional activation (reviewed in Chen and Courey, 2000). Although this model for WNT-dependent activation of target genes is widely accepted, it is important to note that TCF/LEF proteins are not redundant and can contribute to WNT target gene expression in a number of different ways (reviewed in Brantjes et al, 2002; MacDonald et al, 2009). In particular, TCF7L1 (TCF3) is thought to have a more pronounced repressor function than other TCF/LEF family members. A couple of recent studies in Xenopus and mammalian cells show that WNT- and beta-catenin-dependent phosphorylation of TCF7L1(TCF3) promotes its dissociation from the promoter of target genes and allows gene expression through relief of this repression activity (Hikasa et al, 2010; Hikasa et al, 2011).<br><br><br>The role of beta-catenin at WNT promoters hinges upon its ability to act as a scaffold for the recruitment of other proteins. The structure of beta-catenin consists of 12 imperfect ARM repeats (R1-12) flanked by an N-terminal and C-terminal extension (NTD and CTD respectively), with a conserved Helix C located between R12 and the CTD. Nuclear beta-catenin interacts with TCF/LEF at WNT target genes through ARM domains 3-9 (Graham et al, 2000; Poy et al, 2001; Xing et al, 2008). The N and the C terminal regions are important for the recruitment of transcriptional activator and repressors that contribute to WNT target gene expression (reviewed in Mosimann et al, 2009; Valenta et al, 2012). The N-terminal ARM domains 1-4 recruit the WNT-pathway specific activators BCL9:PYGO while the C-terminal region (R11-CTD) interacts with a wide range of general transcriptional activators that are involved in chromatin remodelling and transcription initiation. These include HATs such as P300, CBP and TIP60, histone methyltransferases such as MLL1 and 2, SWI/SNF factors BRG1 and ISWI and components of the PAF complex (reviewed in Mosimann et al, 2009; Valenta et al, 2012). Although many binding partners have been identified for the C-terminal region of beta-catenin, in many cases the timing and relationship of these interactions and indeed, the exact complex composition remains to be elucidated. Moreover, because many of the interacting partners appear to bind to overlapping regions of beta-catenin, it is unlikely that they all bind simultaneously. For simplicity, the interactions have been depicted as though they occur independently of one another; more accurately they are likely to cycle successively on and off beta-catenin to promote an active chromatin structure (reviewed in Willert and Jones, 2006; Valenta et al, 2012).
R-HSA-113418	Formation of the Early Elongation Complex	Transcription elongation by RNA polymerase II (RNAPII) is controlled by a number of trans-acting transcription elongation factors as well as by cis-acting elements. Transcription elongation is a rate-limiting step for proper mRNA production in which the phosphorylation of Pol II CTD is a crucial biochemical event. The role of CTD phosphorylation in transcription by Pol II is greatly impaired by protein kinase inhibitors such as 5,6-dichloro-1- ribofuranosylbenzimidazole (DRB), which block CTD phosphorylation and induce arrest of elongating Pol II. DRB-sensitive activation Pol II CTD during elongation has enabled the isolation of two sets of factors -Negative Elongation Factors (NELF) and DRB sensitivity inducing factor (DSIF). P-Tefb is a DRB-sensitive, cyclin-dependent CTD kinase composed of Cdk9 that carries out Serine-2 phosphorylation of Pol II CTD during elongation.<BR>The mechanism by which DSIF, NELF and P-TEFb act together in Pol II-regulated elongation is yet to be fully understood. Various biochemical evidences point to a model in which DSIF and NELF negatively regulate elongation through interactions with polymerase containing a hypophosphorylated CTD. Subsequent phosphorylation of the Pol II CTD by P-Tefb might promote elongation by inhibiting interactions of DSIF and NELF with the elongation complex.<BR>
R-HSA-75094	Formation of the Editosome	The editosome for C to U editing in mammals consist of a member of cytidine deaminase family of enzymes, apoB mRNA editig catalytic polypeptide 1 (APOBEC-1) and a complementing specificity factor (ACF) in addition to the target mRNA.
R-HSA-167158	Formation of the HIV-1 Early Elongation Complex	This HIV-1 event was inferred from the corresponding human RNA Poll II transcription event. The details relevant to HIV-1 are described below. Formation of the early elongation complex involves hypophosphorylation of RNA Pol II CTD by FCP1P protein, association of the DSIF complex with RNA Pol II, and formation of DSIF:NELF:HIV-1 early elongation complex as described below (Mandal et al 2002; Kim et al 2003; Yamaguchi et al 2002).
R-HSA-72695	Formation of the ternary complex, and subsequently, the 43S complex	Binding of the methionyl-tRNA initiator to the active eIF2:GTP complex results in the formation of the ternary complex. Subsequently, this Met-tRNAi:eIF2:GTP (ternary) complex binds to the complex formed by the 40S subunit, eIF3 and eIF1A, to form the 43S complex.
R-HSA-389960	Formation of tubulin folding intermediates by CCT/TriC	TriC/CCT forms a binary complex with unfolded alpha- or beta-tubulin (Frydman et al., 1992; Gao et al., 1993). The tubulin folding intermediates produced by TriC are unstable (Gao et al., 1993). Five additional protein cofactors (cofactor A-E) are required for the generation of properly folded alpha- and beta-tubulin and for the formation of alpha/beta-tubulin heterodimers (Gao et al., 1993) (Tian et al., 1997, Cowan and Lewis 2001).
R-HSA-444473	Formyl peptide receptors bind formyl peptides and many other ligands	The formyl peptide receptor (FPR) was defined pharmacologically in 1976 as a high affinity binding site on the surface of neutrophils for the peptide N-formyl-methionine-leucine-phenylalanine (fMLF). FPR was cloned in 1990 and the cDNA used as a probe to identify two additional genes, FPRL1 and FPRL2. The three genes for a cluster on 19q13.3. All are coupled to the Gi family of G proteins. <br> All 3 receptors can be activated by formyl peptides but also display affinities for a range of structurally diverse ligands. 
R-HSA-444209	Free fatty acid receptors	Fatty acids are the ligands for a small family of G-protein-coupled receptors, the Free Fatty Acid receptors, and an unrelated receptor GPR120. <br><br>Free fatty acid receptor 1 (FFAR1/GPR40) is activated by both saturated and unsaturated medium to long-chain fatty acids while FFAR2 (GPR43) and FFAR3 (GPR41) are activated by short-chain fatty acids (carboxylates) with six or fewer carbon molecules. A fourth highly homologous receptor GPR42 is believed to be a pseudogene with intact open reading frame, but could be a functional gene in a significant fraction of the human population. <br><br>GPR120 is activated by long chain (C16-22) fatty acids.
R-HSA-400451	Free fatty acids regulate insulin secretion	Free fatty acids augment the glucose-triggered secretion of insulin. The augmentation is believed to be due to the additive effects of the activation of the free fatty acid receptor 1 (FFAR1 or GPR40) and the metabolism of free fatty acids within the pancreatic beta cell. This module describes each pathway.
R-HSA-5654693	FRS-mediated FGFR1 signaling	The FRS family of scaffolding adaptor proteins has two members, FRS2 (also known as FRS2 alpha) and FRS3 (also known as FRS2beta or SNT-2). Activation of FGFR tyrosine kinase allows FRS proteins to become phosphorylated on tyrosine residues and then bind to the adaptor GRB2 and the tyrosine phosphatase PPTN11/SHP2. Subsequently, PPTN11 activates the RAS-MAP kinase pathway and GRB2 activates the RAS-MAP kinase , PI-3-kinase and ubiquitinations/degradation pathways by binding to SOS, GAB1 and CBL, respectively, via the SH3 domains of GRB2. FRS2 acts as a central mediator in FGF signaling mainly because it induces sustained levels of activation of ERK with ubiquitous expression.<br><br><br>
R-HSA-5654700	FRS-mediated FGFR2 signaling	The FRS family of scaffolding adaptor proteins has two members, FRS2 (also known as FRS2 alpha) and FRS3 (also known as FRS2beta or SNT-2). Activation of FGFR tyrosine kinase allows FRS proteins to become phosphorylated on tyrosine residues and then bind to the adaptor GRB2 and the tyrosine phosphatase PPTN11/SHP2. Subsequently, PPTN11 activates the RAS-MAP kinase pathway and GRB2 activates the RAS-MAP kinase , PI-3-kinase and ubiquitinations/degradation pathways by binding to SOS, GAB1 and CBL, respectively, via the SH3 domains of GRB2. FRS2 acts as a central mediator in FGF signaling mainly because it induces sustained levels of activation of ERK with ubiquitous expression.<br><br><br>
R-HSA-5654706	FRS-mediated FGFR3 signaling	The FRS family of scaffolding adaptor proteins has two members, FRS2 (also known as FRS2 alpha) and FRS3 (also known as FRS2beta or SNT-2). Activation of FGFR tyrosine kinase allows FRS proteins to become phosphorylated on tyrosine residues and then bind to the adaptor GRB2 and the tyrosine phosphatase PPTN11/SHP2. Subsequently, PPTN11 activates the RAS-MAP kinase pathway and GRB2 activates the RAS-MAP kinase , PI-3-kinase and ubiquitinations/degradation pathways by binding to SOS, GAB1 and CBL, respectively, via the SH3 domains of GRB2. FRS2 acts as a central mediator in FGF signaling mainly because it induces sustained levels of activation of ERK with ubiquitous expression.<br><br><br>
R-HSA-5654712	FRS-mediated FGFR4 signaling	The FRS family of scaffolding adaptor proteins has two members, FRS2 (also known as FRS2 alpha) and FRS3 (also known as FRS2beta or SNT-2). Activation of FGFR tyrosine kinase allows FRS proteins to become phosphorylated on tyrosine residues and then bind to the adaptor GRB2 and the tyrosine phosphatase PPTN11/SHP2. Subsequently, PPTN11 activates the RAS-MAP kinase pathway and GRB2 activates the RAS-MAP kinase , PI-3-kinase and ubiquitinations/degradation pathways by binding to SOS, GAB1 and CBL, respectively, via the SH3 domains of GRB2. FRS2 acts as a central mediator in FGF signaling mainly because it induces sustained levels of activation of ERK with ubiquitous expression.<br><br><br>
R-HSA-170968	Frs2-mediated activation	The adaptor protein Frs2 (Fibroblast growth factor receptor substrate 2) can mediate the prolonged activation of the MAPK (ERK) cascade. 
R-HSA-5652227	Fructose biosynthesis	The conversion of glucose to fructose via sorbitol was demonstrated by Hers (1960) in the seminal vesicles of sheep, has since been demonstrated as well in human epidydimal tissue (Frenette et al. 2006), and appears to be the physiological source of the abundant fructose found in seminal fluid. The enzymes of the pathway are likewise abundant in the eye lens and in neurons, where their physiological role is less clear but where they appear to play a central role in diabetic tissue damage (Oates 2008). 
R-HSA-70350	Fructose catabolism	Fructose occurs naturally in foods as a free monosaccharide and as a component of the disaccharide sucrose. It is also widely used as a sweetener. In the body, fructose catabolism occurs in the liver and to a lesser extent in the kidney and small intestine. In these tissues, it is converted to dihydroxyacetone phosphate and D-glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate, two intermediates in the glycolytic pathway, in a sequence of three reactions. It is phosphorylated to form fructose 1-phosphate, which is cleaved by aldolase to yield dihydroxyacetone phosphate and D-glyceraldehyde, and the latter compound is phosphorylated to yield D-glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate. Other pathways exist for the conversion of D-glyceraldehyde to intermediates of glycolysis, but these appear to play only a minor role in normal fructose metabolism (Sillero et al. 1969).
R-HSA-5652084	Fructose metabolism	Fructose is found in fruits, is one of the components of the disaccharide sucrose, and is a widely used sweetener in processed foods. Dietary fructose is catabolized in the liver via fructose 1-phosphate to yield dihydroxyacetone phosphate and glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate, which then are converted to pyruvate via steps of canonical glycolysis (Hers & Kusaka 1953; Sillero et al. 1969). Excessive dietary intake of fructose and its metabolism have been associated with major disease risks in humans, although this issue remains controversial (Kolderup & Svihus 2015; DiNicolantonio et al. 2015; Bray 2013; Mayes 1993; Rippe & Angelopoulos 2013; van Buul et al. 2013). Fructose can also be synthesized from glucose via the polyol pathway (Hers 1960; Oates 2008). This synthetic process provides the fructose found in seminal fluid and, in other tissues, can contribute to pathologies of diabetes.
R-HSA-168270	Fusion and Uncoating of the Influenza Virion	Uncoating of viral particles takes place in the host cell endosome. Acidification of the endosome promotes fusion of the viral and endosomal membranes, causing a structural change in the viral hemagglutinin (HA) and freeing the fusion peptide of its HA2 subunit to interact with the endosome membrane. The concerted structural change of several HA molecules opens up a pore through which the viral RNP passes into the cytosol of the cell. The precise timing and the location of uncoating (early vs. late endosomes) depends on the pH-mediated transition of the specific HA molecule involved. The virus-associated M2 ion channel protein allows the influx of H+ ions into the virion, which disrupts protein-protein interactions, resulting in the release of RNP free of the viral M1 matrix protein. Thus the HA mediated fusion of the viral membrane with the endosomal membrane and the M2-mediated release of the RNP results in the release of the RNP complex into the cytosol. Amantadine and rimantadine have been shown to block the ion channel activity of the M2 protein and thus interfere with uncoating.
R-HSA-168288	Fusion of the Influenza Virion to the Host Cell Endosome	After the virus binds to the target cell surface and is endocytosed, the low pH of the endosome causes the viral HA (hemagglutinin) to undergo a structural change which frees the fusion peptide of its HA2 subunit allowing it to interact with the endosome membrane. The transmembrane domain of the HA2 (inserted into the viral membrane) and the fusion peptide (inserted into the endosomal membrane) are in juxtaposition in the acidic pH structure of HA. The concerted structural change of several hemagglutinin molecules then opens a pore through which the viral RNP will be able to pass into the host cell cytosol.
R-HSA-416482	G alpha (12/13) signalling events	The G12/13 family is probably the least well characterized subtype, partly because G12/13 coupling is difficult to determine when compared with the other subtypes which predominantly rely on assay technologies that measure intracellular calcium. The G12/13 family are best known for their involvement in the processes of cell proliferation and morphology, such as stress fiber and focal adhesion formation. Interactions with Rho guanine nucleotide exchange factors (RhoGEFs) are thought to mediate many of these processes. (Buhl et al.1995, Sugimoto et al. 2003). Activation of Rho or the regulation of events through Rho is often taken as evidence of G12/13 signaling. Receptors that are coupled with G12/13 invariably couple with one or more other G protein subtypes, usually Gq.
R-HSA-418594	G alpha (i) signalling events	The classical signalling mechanism for G alpha (i) is inhibition of the cAMP dependent pathway through inhibition of adenylate cyclase. Decreased production of cAMP from ATP results in decreased activity of cAMP-dependent protein kinases.
R-HSA-416476	G alpha (q) signalling events	The classic signalling route for G alpha (q) is activation of phospholipase C beta thereby triggering phosphoinositide hydrolysis, calcium mobilization and protein kinase C activation. This provides a path to calcium-regulated kinases and phosphatases, GEFs, MAP kinase cassettes and other proteins that mediate cellular responses ranging from granule secretion, integrin activation, and aggregation in platelets. Gq participates in many other signalling events including direct interaction with RhoGEFs that stimulate RhoA activity and inhibition of PI3K. Both in vitro and in vivo, the G-protein Gq seems to be the predominant mediator of the activation of platelets.
R-HSA-418555	G alpha (s) signalling events	The general function of the G alpha (s) subunit (Gs) is to activate adenylate cyclase, which in turn produces cAMP, leading to the activation of cAMP-dependent protein kinases (often referred to collectively as Protein Kinase A). The signal from the ligand-stimulated GPCR is amplified because the receptor can activate several Gs heterotrimers before it is inactivated.
R-HSA-418597	G alpha (z) signalling events	The heterotrimeric G protein Gz, is a member of the Gi family. Unlike other Gi family members it lacks an ADP ribosylation site cysteine four residues from the carboxyl terminus and is thus pertussis toxin-insensitive. It inhibits adenylyl cyclase types I, V and VI. G alpha (z) interacts with the Rap1 GTPase activating protein (Rap1GAP) to attenuate Rap1 signaling. Like all G-proteins Gz has an intrinsic GTPase activity, but this activity tends to be lower for the pertussis toxin insensitive G-proteins, most strikingly so for Gz, whose kcat value for GTP hydrolysis is 200-fold lower than those of Gs or Gi (Grazziano et al. 1989). Gz knockout mice have disrupted platelet aggregation at physiological concentrations of epinephrine and responses to several neuroactive drugs are altered (Yang et al. 2000).
R-HSA-392451	G beta:gamma signalling through PI3Kgamma	PI3K gamma (PI3KG) is a heterodimer consisting of a p110 catalytic subunit associated with a regulatory p101 or p84 subunit. PI3KG is most highly expressed in neutrophils, where the p101 form predominates (approximately 95%). G beta:gamma recruits PI3KG to the plasma membrane, both activating PI3KG and providing access to its substrate PIP2, which is converted to PIP3.
R-HSA-418217	G beta:gamma signalling through PLC beta	Phospholipase C beta (PLCbeta) isoforms are activated by G-protein beta:gamma in the order PLCB3 > PLCB2 > PLCB1. Gbeta:gamma binds to the pleckstrin homology domain of PLC beta, increasing phospholipase activity and leading to increased hydrolysis of PIP2 to DAG and IP3.
R-HSA-1296059	G protein gated Potassium channels	Inwardly rectifying G protein activated K+ channels (GIRK) are tetrameric assemblies of Ki3 3 family subunits (Kir 3.1, 3.2 3.3 and 3.4). The activation of G protein coupled receptor by ligand results in the liberation of G alpha and G beta gamma subunits. Gbeta gamma subunits interact and activate GIRK channels.
R-HSA-202040	G-protein activation	Receptor activated heterotrimeric G proteins consist of the Galpha and the tightly associated Gbeta-gamma subunits. When a ligand binds to a G protein-coupled receptor, it stabilises a conformation with an high affinity for the G-protein bound to GDP. GDP is then exchanged for GTP on the Galpha subunit. This exchange triggers the dissociation of the Galpha subunit from the Gbeta-gamma dimer and the receptor. Galpha-GTP and Gbeta-gamma, can then modulate different signalling cascades and effector proteins, while the receptor is able to activate another G protein, resulting in an amplification cascade. The Galpha subunit will eventually hydrolyze the attached GTP to GDP by its inherent enzymatic activity, allowing it to reassociate with Gbeta-gamma and start a new cycle.
R-HSA-397795	G-protein beta:gamma signalling	The classical role of the G-protein beta/gamma dimer was believed to be the inactivation of the alpha subunit, Gbeta/gamma was viewed as a negative regulator of Galpha signalling. It is now known that Gbeta/gamma subunits can directly modulate many effectors, including some also regulated by G alpha.
R-HSA-112040	G-protein mediated events	When dissociated Galpha-GTP and Gbeta-gamma can activate or inhibit different signalling cascades and effector proteins. The precise pathways depends on the identity of the alpha and beta/gamma subtypes.
R-HSA-1538133	G0 and Early G1	In G0 and early G1 in quiescent cells, p130 (RBL2) bound to E2F4 or E2F5 and either DP1 or DP2, associates with the MuvB complex, forming an evolutionarily conserved DREAM complex, that represses transcription of cell cycle genes. During early G1 phase in actively cycling cells, p107 (RBL1) forms a complex with E2F4 and DP1 or DP2 and represses transcription of E2F target genes. Both p130 (RBL2) and p107 (RBL1) repress transcription of E2F targets through recruiting histone deacetylase HDAC1, possibly in complex with other chromatin modifying enzymes, to E2F-regulated promoters. Expression of p107 (RBL1) is cell cycle regulated, with its levels peaking in late G1 and S phase. Although p107 (RBL1) is phosphorylated by cyclin D assocaited kinases during late G1 phase, a small pool of p107 (RBL1) is thought to be present throughout G1 and S phase, and could be involved in fine tuning the transcription of S-phase genes. This is supported by studies showing that unlike RB1 and p130 (RBL2), which are able to induce G1 arrest when over-expressed, p107 (RBL1) over-expression can arrest the cell cycle in both G1 and S phase. For recent reviews on the function of p107, p130 and pocket proteins in general, please refer to Wirt and Sage, 2010, MacPherson 2008 and Cobrinik 2005.
R-HSA-69236	G1 Phase	Early cell cycle progression in G1 is under the control of the D-type cyclins together with Cdk4 and Cdk6. An important target for these CDKs is the Retinoblastoma (Rb) protein, which when phosphorylated promotes cell cycle progression by releasing E2F transcription factors that transactivate several important genes for later cell cycle events. The formation of Cyclin D - Cdk4/6 complexes is promoted by two proteins, p21Cip1/Waf1 and p27kip1, and their activity can be inhibited by the binding of several small CDK-inhibitory proteins (CKIs): p15INK4B, p16INK4A, p18INK4C and p19INK4D. 
R-HSA-69615	G1/S DNA Damage Checkpoints	In the G1 phase there are two types of DNA damage responses, the p53-dependent and the p53-independent pathways. The p53-dependent responses inhibit CDKs through the up-regulation of genes encoding CKIs mediated by the p53 protein, whereas the p53-independent mechanisms inhibit CDKs through the inhibitory T14Y15 phosphorylation of Cdk2. Failure of DNA damage checkpoints in G1 leads to mutagenic replication of damaged templates and other replication defects.
R-HSA-69206	G1/S Transition	Cyclin E - Cdk2 complexes control the transition from G1 into S-phase. In this case, the binding of p21Cip1/Waf1 or p27kip1 is inhibitory. Important substrates for Cyclin E - Cdk2 complexes include proteins involved in the initiation of DNA replication. The two Cyclin E proteins are subjected to ubiquitin-dependent proteolysis, under the control of an E3 ubiquitin ligase known as the SCF. Cyclin A - Cdk2 complexes, which are also regulated by p21Cip1/Waf1 and p27kip1, are likely to be important for continued DNA synthesis, and progression into G2. An additional level of control of Cdk2 is reversible phosphorylation of Threonine-14 (T14) and Tyrosine-15 (Y15), catalyzed by the Wee1 and Myt1 kinases, and dephosphorylation by the three Cdc25 phosphatases, Cdc25A, B and C. 
R-HSA-69205	G1/S-Specific Transcription	The E2F family of transcription factors regulate the transition from the G1 to the S phase in the cell cycle. E2F activity is regulated by members of the retinoblastoma protein (pRb) family, resulting in the tight control of the expression of E2F-responsive genes. Phosphorylation of pRb by cyclin D:CDK complexes releases pRb from E2F, inducing E2F-targeted genes such as cyclin E.
R-HSA-68911	G2 Phase	This is one of two 'gap' phases in the standard eukaryotic mitotic cell cycle. It is the interval between the completion of DNA synthesis and the beginning of mitosis. Protein synthesis occurs in this phase, following DNA replication in the S phase. This is the time when the cell stockpiles on the cytoplasmic contents, before mitosis and cytokinesis occur.
R-HSA-69481	G2/M Checkpoints	G2/M checkpoints include the checks for damaged DNA, unreplicated DNA, and checks that ensure that the genome is replicated once and only once per cell cycle. If cells pass these checkpoints, they follow normal transition to the M phase. However, if any of these checkpoints fail, mitotic entry is prevented by specific G2/M checkpoint events.<p>The G2/M checkpoints can fail due to the presence of unreplicated DNA or damaged DNA. In such instances, the cyclin-dependent kinase, Cdc2(Cdk1), is maintained in its inactive, phosphorylated state, and mitotic entry is prevented. Events that ensure that origins of DNA replication fire once and only once per cell cycle are also an example of a G2/M checkpoint.<p>In the event of high levels of DNA damage, the cells may also be directed to undergo apopotosis (not covered).
R-HSA-69473	G2/M DNA damage checkpoint	Throughout the cell cycle, the genome is constantly monitored for damage, resulting either from errors of replication, by-products of metabolism or through extrinsic sources such as ultra-violet or ionizing radiation. The different DNA damage checkpoints act to inhibit or maintain the inhibition of the relevant CDK that will control the next cell cycle transition. The G2 DNA damage checkpoint prevents mitotic entry solely through T14Y15 phosphorylation of Cdc2 (Cdk1). Failure of the G2 DNA damage checkpoint leads to catastrophic attempts to segregate unrepaired chromosomes.
R-HSA-69478	G2/M DNA replication checkpoint	The G2/M DNA replication checkpoint ensures that mitosis is not initiated until DNA replication is complete. If replication is blocked, the DNA replication checkpoint signals to maintain Cyclin B - Cdc2 complexes in their T14Y15 phosphorylated and inactive state. This prevents the phosphorylation of proteins involved in G2/M transition, and prevents mitotic entry.<p>Failure of these checkpoints results in changes of ploidy: in the case of mitosis without completion of DNA replication, aneuploidy of <2C will result, and the opposite is true if DNA replication is completed more than once in a single cell cycle with an overall increase in ploidy. The mechanism by which unreplicated DNA is first detected by the cell is unknown.
R-HSA-69275	G2/M Transition	Cyclin A can also form complexes with Cdc2 (Cdk1). Together with three B-type cyclins, Cdc2 (Cdk1) regulates the transition from G2 into mitosis. These complexes are activated by dephosphorylation of T14 and Y15. Cyclin A, B - Cdc2 complexes phosphorylate several proteins involved in mitotic spindle structure and function, the breakdown of the nuclear envelope, and topological changes in chromosomes allowing resolution of their entanglement and condensation that is necessary for the ~2 meters of DNA to be segregated at mitosis. 
R-HSA-180292	GAB1 signalosome	GAB1 is recruited to the activated EGFR indirectly, through GRB2. GAB1 acts as an adaptor protein that enables formation of an active PIK3, through recruitment of PIK3 regulatory subunit PIK3R1 (also known as PI3Kp85), which subsequently recruits PIK3 catalytic subunit PIK3CA (also known as PI3Kp110). PIK3, in complex with EGFR, GRB2 and GAB1, catalyzes phosphorylation of PIP2 and its conversion to PIP3, which leads to the activation of the AKT signaling. 
R-HSA-977442	GABA A (rho) receptor activation	GABA A (rho) receptors are highly expressed in the retina and are functional homopentamers of rho subunits. These receptors are formerly called GABA C receptors.
R-HSA-977441	GABA A receptor activation	GABA B receptors are G protein coupled receptors that are activated by GABA binding to the B1 subunit and B2 subunit alters the activity of adenylate cyclase by interacting with the G alpha i/alpha 0 subunit of the pertussis toxin sensitive G protein. The activation of GABA B receptors results in the inhibition of adenylate cyclase activity decreasing the levels of cyclic AMP production and hence the activity of Protein kinase A.
R-HSA-977444	GABA B receptor activation	Functional GABA B receptors are heteromers of GABA B1 and B2 subunits, complexed with G protein alpha-i, 0, beta, and gamma subunits. They function as metabotropic receptors. When GABA is bound to the B1 sub-unit, the B2 subunit undergoes a conformational change that releases the G alpha-i G0 dimer (which binds and inactivates cytosolic adenylate cyclase) and the G beta G gamma dimer (which activates the GIRK (KIR3) potassium channel) (Pinard et al. 2010).
R-HSA-977443	GABA receptor activation	Gamma aminobutyric acid (GABA) receptors are the major inhibitory receptors in human synapses. They are of two types. GABA A receptors are fast-acting ligand gated chloride ion channels that mediate membrane depolarization and thus inhibit neurotransmitter release (G Michels et al Crit Rev Biochem Mol Biol 42, 2007, 3-14). GABA B receptors are slow acting metabotropic Gprotein coupled receptors that act via the inhibitory action of their Galpha/Go subunits on adenylate cyclase to attenuate the actions of PKA. In addition, their Gbeta/gamma subunits interact directly with N and P/Q Ca2+ channels to decrease the release of Ca2+. GABA B receptors also interact with Kir3 K+ channels and increase the influx of K+, leading to cell membrane hyperpolarization and inhibition of channels such as NMDA receptors (A Pinard et al Adv Pharmacol, 58, 2010, 231-55). 
R-HSA-888568	GABA synthesis	GABA synthesized uniquely by two forms of glutamate decarboxylases, GAD65 and GAD67, that are functionally distinct and have different co-factor requirements. GAD65 is functionally linked to VGAT, the GABA transporter and selectively GABA synthesized by GAD65 is preferably loaded into the synaptic vesicles. GABA synthesized by GAD67 may be used for functions other than nuerotransmission.
R-HSA-888590	GABA synthesis, release, reuptake and degradation	GABA is a major inhibitory neurotransmitter in the mammalian central nervous system. GABA modulates neuronal excitability throughout the nervous system. Disruption of GABA neurotransmission leads to many neurological diseases including epilepsy and a general anxiety disorder. GABA is synthesized by two distinct enzymes GAD67 and GAD65 that differ in their cellular localization, functional properties and co-factor requirements. GABA synthesized by GAD65 is used for neurotransmission whereas GABA synthesized by GAD67 is used for processes other than neurotransmission such as synaptogenesis and protection against neuronal injury. GABA is loaded into synaptic vesicle with the help of vesicular inhibitory amino acid transporter or VGAT. GAD65 and VGAT are functionally linked at the synaptic vesicle membrane and GABA synthesized by GAD65 is preferentially loaded into the synaptic vesicle over GABA synthesized in cytoplasm by GAD67.The GABA loaded synaptic vesicles are docked at the plasma membrane with the help of the SNARE complexes and primed by interplay between various proteins including Munc18, complexin etc. Release of GABA loaded synaptic vesicle is initiated by the arrival of action potential at the presynaptic bouton and opening of N or P/Q voltage gated Ca2+ channels. Ca2+ influx results in Ca2+ binding by synaptobrevin, which is a part of the SNARE complex that also includes SNAP25 and syntaxin, leading to synaptic vesicle fusion. Release of GABA in the synaptic cleft leads to binding of GABA by the GABA receptors and post ligand binding events.
R-HSA-70370	Galactose catabolism	The main sources of galactose in the human diet are milk and milk products. The disaccharide lactose from these sources is hydrolyzed in the intestine to its constituent monosaccharides, glucose and galactose. Galactose is metabolized primarily in the liver in a sequence of three reactions that yield one molecule of glucose 1-phosphate per molecule of galactose. First, it is phosphorylated to yield galactose 1-phosphate. Then, galactose 1-phosphate and UDP-glucose react to form UDP-galactose and glucose 1-phosphate, and UDP-galactose undergoes epimerization to form UDP-glucose. In a reaction shared with other pathways, glucose 1-phosphate can be converted into glucose 6-phosphate (Holton et al. 2001; Elsas and Lai 2001).
R-HSA-163841	Gamma carboxylation, hypusine formation and arylsulfatase activation	After translation, many newly formed proteins undergo further covalent modifications that alter their functional properties and that are essentially irreversible under physiological conditions in the body. These modifications include the vitamin K-dependent attachment of carboxyl groups to glutamate residues and the conversion of a lysine residue in eIF5A to hypusine, and the conversion of a histidine residue in EEF to diphthamide.
R-HSA-159740	Gamma-carboxylation of protein precursors	Gamma-carboxylation of a cluster of glutamate residues near the amino termini of thrombin, factor VII, factor IX, factor X, protein C, protein S, protein Z, and Gas 6 is required for these proteins to bind Ca++ and function efficiently in blood clotting. A single enzyme, vitamin K-dependent gamma-carboxylase, catalyzes the gamma-carboxylation of all eight proteins involved in clotting (Morris et al. 1995; Brenner et al. 1998; Spronk et al. 2000). In the carboxylation reaction, the enzyme binds its substrate protein via a sequence motif on the amino terminal side of the glutamate residues to be carboxylated (Furie et al. 1999), then processively carboxylates all glutamates in the cluster before releasing the substrate (Morris et al. 1995; Berkner 2000; Stenina et al. 2001). The reaction occurs in the endoplasmic reticulum (Bristol et al. 1996).
R-HSA-159854	Gamma-carboxylation, transport, and amino-terminal cleavage of proteins	A number of proteins, including eight required for normal blood clot formation and its regulation (Prothrombin (factor II), factor VII, factor IX, factor X, protein C, protein S, protein Z, and Gas6) share a sequence motif rich in glutamate residues near their amino termini. Carboxylation of the glutamate residues within this motif followed by removal of an aminoterminal propeptide is required for each of these proteins to function. These modifications occur as the proteins move through the endoplasmic reticulum and Golgi apparatus.
R-HSA-190861	Gap junction assembly	The assembly of gap junctions involves (1) synthesis of connexin polypeptides at endoplasmic reticulum membranes, (2) oligomerization into homomeric- and heteromeric gap junction connexons (hemi-channels), (3) passage through the Golgi stacks, (4) intracellular storage within Trans Golgi membranes, (5) trafficking along microtubules, (6) insertion of connexons into the plasma membrane, (7) lateral diffusion of connexons in the plasma membrane, (8) aggregation of individual gap junction channels into plaques, and (9) stabilization of peripheral microtubule plus-ends by binding to Cx43-based gap junctions (see Segretain and Falk, 2004.)
R-HSA-190873	Gap junction degradation	The half-life of Cx is very short (1 to 5h) compared to other junctional proteins (Laird et al., 1995 ; Fallon and Goudenough, 1981). Connexins are targeted for degradation by the proteasome and the lysosome. Degradation appears to involve the phosphorylation of Connexins as well as their interactions with other proteins (Piehl et al., 2007).
R-HSA-190828	Gap junction trafficking	Gap junctions are intercellular communication channels formed from Cx (connexin) protein subunits (see Segretain and Falk 2004 and Evans et al. 2006 for comprehensive reviews). Connexins are transported to the plasma membrane after oligomerizing into hexameric assemblies called hemichannels (CxHcs) or connexons. Connexons dock head-to-head in the extracellular space with opposing hexameric channels located in the plasma membranes of neighbouring cells. The double membrane channel or gap junction generated directly links the cytoplasms of interacting cells and facilitates the integration and co-ordination of cellular signalling, metabolism, secretion and contraction. In addition to their role in intercellular communication, connexon hemichannels coordinate the release of ATP, glutamate, NAD+ and prostaglandin E2 from the cells. CxHcs open in response to various types of external changes, including mechanical, shear, ionic and ischaemic stress.<p>The trafficking of gap junctions involves (1) synthesis of connexin polypeptides at endoplasmic reticulum membranes, (2) oligomerization into homomeric- and heteromeric gap junction connexons (hemi-channels), (3) passage through the Golgi stacks, (4) intracellular storage within Trans Golgi membranes, (5) trafficking along microtubules, (6) insertion of connexons into the plasma membrane, (7) lateral diffusion of connexons in the plasma membrane, (8) aggregation of individual gap junction channels into plaques, (9) stabilization of peripheral microtubule plus-ends by binding to Cx43-based gap junctions, (10) internalization of the channel plaque leading to cytoplasmic annular junctions, and (11) complete degradation via lysosomal and proteasomal pathways (see Segretain and Falk 2004). Aspects of gap assembly are described here.
R-HSA-157858	Gap junction trafficking and regulation	Gap junctions are clusters of intercellular channels connecting adjacent cells and permitting the direct exchange of ions and small molecules between cells. These channels are composed of two hemichannels, or connexons, one located on each of the two neighboring cells. Each connexon is composed of 6 trans-membrane protein subunits of the connexin (Cx) family. A gap of approximately 3 nm remains between the adjacent cell membranes, but two connexons interact and dock head-to-head in the extra-cellular space forming a tightly sealed, double-membrane intercellular channel (see Segretain and Falk, 2004). The activity of these intercellular channels is regulated, particularly by intramolecular modifications such as phosphorylation which appears to regulate connexin turnover, gap junction assembly and the opening and closure (gating) of gap junction channels. 
R-HSA-5696397	Gap-filling DNA repair synthesis and ligation in GG-NER	Global genome nucleotide excision repair (GG-NER) is completed by DNA repair synthesis that fills the single stranded gap created after dual incision of the damaged DNA strand and excision of the ~27-30 bases long oligonucleotide that contains the lesion. DNA synthesis is performed by DNA polymerases epsilon or delta, or the Y family DNA polymerase kappa (POLK), which are loaded to the repair site after 5' incision (Staresincic et al. 2009, Ogi et al. 2010). DNA ligases LIG1 or LIG3 (as part of the LIG3:XRCC1 complex) ligate the newly synthesized stretch of oligonucleotides to the incised DNA strand (Moser et al. 2007).
R-HSA-6782210	Gap-filling DNA repair synthesis and ligation in TC-NER	In transcription-coupled nucleotide excision repair (TC-NER), similar to global genome nucleotide excision repair (GG-NER), DNA polymerases delta or epsilon, or the Y family DNA polymerase kappa, fill in the single stranded gap that remains after dual incision. DNA ligases LIG1 or LIG3, the latter in complex with XRCC1, subsequently seal the single stranded nick by ligating the 3' end of the newly synthesized patch with the 5' end of incised DNA (Moser et al. 2007, Staresincic et al. 2009, Ogi et al. 2010).
R-HSA-881907	Gastrin-CREB signalling pathway via PKC and MAPK	Gastrin is a hormone whose main function is to stimulate secretion of hydrochloric acid by the gastric mucosa, which results in gastrin formation inhibition. This hormone also acts as a mitogenic factor for gastrointestinal epithelial cells. Gastrin has two biologically active peptide forms, G34 and G17.Gastrin gene expression is upregulated in both a number of pre-malignant conditions and in established cancer through a variety of mechanisms. Depending on the tissue where it is expressed and the level of expression, differential processing of the polypeptide product leads to the production of different biologically active peptides. In turn, acting through the classical gastrin cholecystokinin B receptor CCK-BR, its isoforms and alternative receptors, these peptides trigger signalling pathways which influence the expression of downstream genes that affect cell survival, angiogenesis and invasion (Wank 1995, de Weerth et al. 1999, Grabowska & Watson 2007)
R-HSA-74160	Gene Expression	Gene Expression covers the pathways by which genomic DNA is transcribed to yield RNA, the regulation of these transcription processes, and the pathways by which newly-made RNA Transcripts are processed. Most annotation is centered on the generation of messenger RNAs (mRNAs) by regulated RNA polymerase II (PolII) transcription, although the activities of PolI and PolIII are also covered briefly, as are some aspects of microRNA generation and function.<p>Aspects of mRNA synthesis annotated here include the assembly of transcription factor complexes and their role in targeting specific genes for transcription, PolII-mediated transcription (RNA synthesis) itself, and the co- and post-translational processing of this RNA, via capping, splicing, and 3'-cleavage and polyadenylation to yield mature mRNA molecules that are exported from the nucleus. mRNA editing and nonsense-mediated decay are also annotated. Processes leading to mRNA breakdown are described: deadenylation-dependent mRNA decay, microRNA-mediated RNA cleavage, and regulation of mRNA stability by proteins that bind AU-rich elements.<p>Other pathways included here are tRNA aminoacylation and snRNP assembly.
R-HSA-211000	Gene Silencing by RNA	In this module, the biology of various types of regulatory non-coding RNAs are described. Currently, biogenesis and functions of small interfering RNAs (siRNAs) and microRNAs are annotated.
R-HSA-202433	Generation of second messenger molecules	In addition to serving as a scaffold via auto-phosphorylation, ZAP-70 also phosphorylates a restricted set of substrates following TCR stimulation - including LAT and SLP-76. These substrates have been recognized to play pivotal role in TCR signaling by releasing second messengers. When phosphorylated, LAT and SLP-76 act as adaptor proteins which serve as nucleation points for the construction of a higher order signalosome: GADS, PLC-gamma1 and GRB2 bind to the LAT on the phosphorylated tyrosine residues (steps 8 and 13). SLP-76 and SOS are then moved to the signalosome by interacting with the SH3 domains of GRB2 and GADS via their proline rich sequences (step 9). Three SLP-76 acidic domain N-term tyrosine residues are phosphorylated by ZAP-70, once SLP-76 binds to GADS (step 10). These phospho-tyrosine residues act as binding sites to the SH2 domains of PLC-gamma1, Vav and Itk (steps 11 and 12). <p>PLC-gamma1 is activated by dual phosphorylation on the tyrosine residues at positions 771, 783 and 1254 by Itk and ZAP-70 (step 14). Phosphorylated PLC-gamma1 subsequently detaches from LAT and SLP-76 and translocates to the plasma membrane by binding to phosphatidylinositol-4,5-bisphosphate (PIP2) via its PH domain (step 15). PLC-gamma1 goes on to hydrolyse PIP2 to second messengers DAG and IP3. These second messengers are involved in PKC and NF-kB activation and calcium mobilization (step 16). 
R-HSA-212436	Generic Transcription Pathway	<b>OVERVIEW OF TRANSCRIPTION REGULATION:</b> <br><br>Detailed studies of gene transcription regulation in a wide variety of eukaryotic systems has revealed the general principles and mechanisms by which cell- or tissue-specific regulation of differential gene transcription is mediated (reviewed in Naar, 2001. Kadonaga, 2004, Maston, 2006, Barolo, 2002; Roeder, 2005, Rosenfeld, 2006). Of the three major classes of DNA polymerase involved in eukaryotic gene transcription, Polymerase II generally regulates protein-encoding genes. Figure 1 shows a diagram of the various components involved in cell-specific regulation of Pol-II gene transcription. <br><br>Core Promoter: Pol II-regulated genes typically have a Core Promoter where Pol II and a variety of general factors bind to specific DNA motifs: <br> i: the TATA box (TATA DNA sequence), which is bound by the "TATA-binding protein" (TBP).<br> ii: the Initiator motif (INR), where Pol II and certain other core factors bind, is present in many Pol II-regulated genes.<br> iii: the Downstream Promoter Element (DPE), which is present in a subset of Pol II genes, and where additional core factors bind. <br>The core promoter binding factors are generally ubiquitously expressed, although there are exceptions to this.<br><br>Proximal Promoter: immediately upstream (5') of the core promoter, Pol II target genes often have a Proximal Promoter region that spans up to 500 base pairs (b.p.), or even to 1000 b.p.. This region contains a number of functional DNA binding sites for a specific set of transcription activator (TA) and transcription repressor (TR) proteins. These TA and TR factors are generally cell- or tissue-specific in expression, rather than ubiquitous, so that the presence of their cognate binding sites in the proximal promoter region programs cell- or tissue-specific expression of the target gene, perhaps in conjunction with TA and TR complexes bound in distal enhancer regions. <br><br>Distal Enhancer(s): many or most Pol II regulated genes in higher eukaryotes have one or more distal Enhancer regions which are essential for proper regulation of the gene, often in a cell or tissue-specific pattern. Like the proximal promoter region, each of the distal enhancer regions typically contain a cluster of binding sites for specific TA and/or TR DNA-binding factors, rather than just a single site. <br><br> Enhancers generally have three defining characteristics:<br> i: They can be located very long distances from the promoter of the target gene they regulate, sometimes as far as 100 Kb, or more.<br> ii: They can be either upstream (5') or downstream (3') of the target gene, including within introns of that gene.<br> iii: They can function in either orientation in the DNA.<br><br>Combinatorial mechanisms of transcription regulation: The specific combination of TA and TR binding sites within the proximal promoter and/or distal enhancer(s) provides a "combinatorial transcription code" that mediates cell- or tissue-specific expression of the associated target gene. Each promoter or enhancer region mediates expression in a specific subset of the overall expression pattern. In at least some cases, each enhancer region functions completely independently of the others, so that the overall expression pattern is a linear combination of the expression patterns of each of the enhancer modules.<br><br>Co-Activator and Co-Repressor Complexes: DNA-bound TA and TR proteins typically recruit the assembly of specific Co-Activator (Co-A) and Co-Repressor (Co-R) Complexes, respectively, which are essential for regulating target gene transcription. Both Co-A's and Co-R's are multi-protein complexes that contain several specific protein components.<br><br>Co-Activator complexes generally contain at lease one component protein that has Histone Acetyl Transferase (HAT) enzymatic activity. This functions to acetylate Histones and/or other chromatin-associated factors, which typically increases that transcription activation of the target gene. By contrast, Co-Repressor complexes generally contain at lease one component protein that has Histone De-Acetylase (HDAC) enzymatic activity. This functions to de-acetylate Histones and/or other chromatin-associated factors. This typically increases the transcription repression of the target gene.<br><br>Adaptor (Mediator) complexes: In addition to the co-activator complexes that assemble on particular cell-specific TA factors, - there are at least two additional transcriptional co-activator complexes common to most cells. One of these is the Mediator complex, which functions as an "adaptor" complex that bridges between the tissue-specific co-activator complexes assembled in the proximal promoter (or distal enhancers). The human Mediator complex has been shown to contain at least 19 protein distinct components. Different combinations of these co-activator proteins are also found to be components of specific transcription Co-Activator complexes, such as the DRIP, TRAP and ARC complexes described below. <br><br>TBP/TAF complex: Another large Co-A complex is the "TBP-associated factors" (TAFs) that assemble on TBP (TATA-Binding Protein), which is bound to the TATA box present in many promoters. There are at least 23 human TAF proteins that have been identified. Many of these are ubiquitously expressed, but TAFs can also be expressed in a cell or tissue-specific pattern. <br><br> <b> Specific Coactivator Complexes for DNA-binding Transcription Factors.</b> <br><br>A number of specific co-activator complexes for DNA-binding transcription factors have been identified, including DRIP, TRAP, and ARC (reviewed in Bourbon, 2004, Blazek, 2005, Conaway, 2005, and Malik, 2005). The DRIP co-activator complex was originally identified and named as a specific complex associated with the Vitamin D Receptor member of the nuclear receptor family of transcription factors (Rachez, 1998). Similarly, the TRAP co-activator complex was originally identified as a complex that associates with the thyroid receptor (Yuan, 1998). It was later determined that all of the components of the DRIP complex are also present in the TRAP complex, and the ARC complex (discussed further below). For example, the DRIP205 and TRAP220 proteins were show to be identical, as were specific pairs of the other components of these complexes (Rachez, 1999).<br><br>In addition, these various transcription co-activator proteins identified in mammalian cells were found to be the orthologues or homologues of the Mediator ("adaptor") complex proteins (reviewed in Bourbon, 2004). The Mediator proteins were originally identified in yeast by Kornberg and colleagues, as complexes associated with DNA polymerase (Kelleher, 1990). In higher organisms, Adapter complexes bridge between the basal transcription factors (including Pol II) and tissue-specific transcription factors (TFs) bound to sites within upstream Proximal Promoter regions or distal Enhancer regions (Figure 1). However, many of the Mediator homologues can also be found in complexes associated with specific transcription factors in higher organisms. A unified nomenclature system for these adapter / co-activator proteins now labels them Mediator 1 through Mediator 31 (Bourbon, 2004). For example, the DRIP205 / TRAP220 proteins are now identified as Mediator 1 (Rachez, 1999), based on homology with yeast Mediator 1.<br><br> <b>Example Pathway: Specific Regulation of Target Genes During Notch Signaling:</b> <br><br>One well-studied example of cell-specific regulation of gene transcription is selective regulation of target genes during Notch signaling. Notch signaling was first identified in Drosophila, where it has been studied in detail at the genetic, molecular, biochemical and cellular levels (reviewed in Justice, 2002; Bray, 2006; Schweisguth, 2004; Louvri, 2006). In Drosophila, Notch signaling to the nucleus is thought always to be mediated by one specific DNA binding transcription factor, Suppressor of Hairless. In mammals, the homologous genes are called CBF1 (or RBPJkappa), while in worms they are called Lag-1, so that the acronym "CSL" has been given to this conserved transcription factor family. There are at least two human CSL homologues, which are now named RBPJ and RBPJL. <br><br>In Drosophila, Su(H) is known to be bifunctional, in that it represses target gene transcription in the absence of Notch signaling, but activates target genes during Notch signaling. At least some of the mammalian CSL homologues are believed also to be bifunctional, and to mediate target gene repression in the absence of Notch signaling, and activation in the presence of Notch signaling.<br><br>Notch Co-Activator and Co-Repressor complexes: This repression is mediated by at least one specific co-repressor complexes (Co-R) bound to CSL in the absence of Notch signaling. In Drosophila, this co-repressor complex consists of at least three distinct co-repressor proteins: Hairless, Groucho, and dCtBP (Drosophila C-terminal Binding Protein). Hairless has been show to bind directly to Su(H), and Groucho and dCtBP have been shown to bind directly to Hairless (Barolo, 2002). All three of the co-repressor proteins have been shown to be necessary for proper gene regulation during Notch signaling in vivo (Nagel, 2005).<br><br>In mammals, the same general pathway and mechanisms are observed, where CSL proteins are bifunctional DNA binding transcription factors (TFs), that bind to Co-Repressor complexes to mediate repression in the absence of Notch signaling, and bind to Co-Activator complexes to mediate activation in the presence of Notch signaling. However, in mammals, there may be multiple co-repressor complexes, rather than the single Hairless co-repressor complex that has been observed in Drosophila. <br><br>During Notch signaling in all systems, the Notch transmembrane receptor is cleaved and the Notch intracellular domain (NICD) translocates to the nucleus, where it there functions as a specific transcription co-activator for CSL proteins. In the nucleus, NICD replaces the Co-R complex bound to CSL, thus resulting in de-repression of Notch target genes in the nucleus (Figure 2). Once bound to CSL, NICD and CSL proteins recruit an additional co-activator protein, Mastermind, to form a CSL-NICD-Mam ternary co-activator (Co-A) complex. This Co-R complex was initially thought to be sufficient to mediate activation of at least some Notch target genes. However, there now is evidence that still other co-activators and additional DNA-binding transcription factors are required in at least some contexts (reviewed in Barolo, 2002). <br><br>Thus, CSL is a good example of a bifunctional DNA-binding transcription factor that mediates repression of specific targets genes in one context, but activation of the same targets in another context. This bifunctionality is mediated by the association of specific Co-Repressor complexes vs. specific Co-Activator complexes in different contexts, namely in the absence or presence of Notch signaling.
R-HSA-5635851	GLI proteins bind promoters of Hh responsive genes to promote transcription	GLI proteins are bifunctional DNA-binding proteins that recognize consensus GLI sites 5'-GACCACCC-3' in the promoters of target genes (Kinzler and Vogelstein, 1990). Pathway induction upon ligand-binding diverts the GLI proteins from the processing/degradation pathway that generates the truncated repressor form and promotes the formation of the full-length transcriptional activator (reviewed in Hui and Angers, 2011; Briscoe and Therond, 2013). GLI-dependent target genes have been identified by a number of ChIP based screens, and well-established, direct targets include a number of Hh pathway members including PTCH1, PTCH2, GLI1, HHIP and BOC (Lee et al, 2010; Vokes et al, 2007; Vokes et al, 2008; Agren et al, 2004; Bai et al, 2004; Bai et al, 2002; Dai et al, 1999). Full-length GLI proteins nucleate the assembly of a transcriptional activation complex at target gene promoters, but the details of interacting partners are not well known. The C-terminus of GLI3 has been shown to interact with a number of transcriptional activators including the histone acetyltransferase CBP, the Mediator component Med12 and the TATA-box recognition protein TAF31, but the detail of how and when these binding partners interact is not known (Dai et al, 1999; Zhou et al, 2006; Yoon et al, 1998; reviewed in Hui and Angers, 2011). Each of the GLI proteins has been shown to bind to CDC 73, a component of the PAF complex that has roles in RNA polymerase II-mediated transcription (Mosimann et al, 2009; reviewed in Tomson and Arndt, 2013).
R-HSA-5610785	GLI3 is processed to GLI3R by the proteasome	In the absence of Hh signaling, the majority of full-length GLI3 is partially processed by the proteasome to a shorter form that serves as the principal repressor of Hh target genes (Wang et al, 2000). Processing depends on phosphorylation at 6 sites by PKA, which primes the protein for subsequent phosphorylation at adjacent sites by CK1 and GSK3. The hyperphosphorylated protein is then a direct target for betaTrCP-dependent ubiquitination and proteasome-dependent processing (Wang and Li, 2006; Tempe et al, 2006; Wen et al, 2010; Schrader et al, 2011; Pan and Wang, 2007).
R-HSA-5696399	Global Genome Nucleotide Excision Repair (GG-NER)	The DNA damage in GG-NER is recognized by the joint action of two protein complexes. The first complex is composed of XPC, RAD23A or RAD23B and CETN2. The second complex, known as the UV-DDB complex, is an ubiquitin ligase composed of DDB1, CUL4A or CUL4B, RBX1 and a GG-NER specific protein DDB2. In vitro, the UV-DDB complex is onlynecessary for GG-NER mediated repair of UV-induced pyrimidine dimers. In vivo, however, where DNA repair occurs in the chromatin context, the UV-DDB complex likely facilitates GG-NER mediated repair irrespective of the DNA damage type.<BR>After DNA damage recognition, the TFIIH complex, together with XPA, verifies the DNA damage and unwinds the DNA helix around the damage, creating an open bubble. Two DNA endonucleases, ERCC5 (XPG) and the complex of ERCC1 and ERCC4 (XPF), excise the oligonucleotide that contains damaged base(s) from the affected DNA strand. DNA polymerases delta, epsilon and/or kappa perform DNA repair synthesis, followed by DNA ligation, thus completing GG-NER.<BR>For a recent review, please refer to Marteijn et al. 2014.
R-HSA-163359	Glucagon signaling in metabolic regulation	Glucagon and insulin are peptide hormones released from the pancreas into the blood, that normally act in complementary fashion to stabilize blood glucose concentration. When blood glucose levels rise, insulin release stimulates glucose uptake from the blood, glucose breakdown (glycolysis), and glucose storage as glycogen. When blood glucose levels fall, glucagon release stimulates glycogen breakdown and de novo glucose synthesis (gluconeogenesis), while inhibiting glycolysis and glycogen synthesis.<br>At a molecular level, the binding of glucagon to the extracellular face of its receptor causes conformational changes in the receptor that allow the dissociation and activation of subunits Gs and Gq. The activation of Gq leads to the activation of phospholipase C, production of inositol 1,4,5-triphosphate, and subsequent release of intracellular calcium. The activation of Gs leads to activation of adenylate cyclase, an increase in intracellular cAMP levels, and activation of protein kinase A (PKA). Active PKA phosphorylates key enzymes of glycogenolysis, glycogenesis, gluconeogenesis, and glycolysis, modifying their activities. These signal transduction events, and some of their downstream consequences, are illustrated below (adapted from Jiang and Zhang, 2003).
R-HSA-381676	Glucagon-like Peptide-1 (GLP1) regulates insulin secretion	Glucagon-like Peptide-1 (GLP-1) is secreted by L-cells in the intestine in response to glucose and fatty acids. GLP-1 circulates to the beta cells of the pancreas where it binds a G-protein coupled receptor, GLP-1R, on the plasma membrane. The binding activates the heterotrimeric G-protein G(s), causing the alpha subunit of G(s) to exchange GDP for GTP and dissociate from the beta and gamma subunits.<br>The activated G(s) alpha subunit interacts with Adenylyl Cyclase VIII (Adenylate Cyclase VIII, AC VIII) and activates AC VIII to produce cyclic AMP (cAMP). cAMP then has two effects: 1) cAMP activates Protein Kinase A (PKA), and 2) cAMP activates Epac1 and Epac2, two guanyl nucleotide exchange factors.<br>Binding of cAMP to PKA causes the catalytic subunits of PKA to dissociate from the regulatory subunits and become an active kinase. PKA is known to enhance insulin secretion by closing ATP-sensitive potassium channels, closing voltage-gated potassium channels, releasing calcium from the endoplasmic reticulum, and affecting insulin secretory granules. The exact mechanisms for PKA's action are not fully known. After prolonged increases in cAMP, PKA translocates to the nucleus where it regulates the PDX-1 and CREB transcription factors, activating transcription of the insulin gene.<br>cAMP produced by AC VIII also activates Epac1 and Epac2, which catalyze the exchange of GTP for GDP on G-proteins, notably Rap1A.. Rap1A regulates insulin secretory granules and is believed to activate the Raf/MEK/ERK mitogenic pathway leading to proliferation of beta cells. The Epac proteins also interact with RYR calcium channels on the endoplasmic reticulum, the SUR1 subunits of ATP-sensitive potassium channels, and the Piccolo:Rim2 calcium sensor at the plasma membrane.
R-HSA-420092	Glucagon-type ligand receptors	The glucagon hormone family regulates the activity of GPCRs from the secretin receptor subfamily in Class II/B (Mayo KE et al, 2003).
R-HSA-194002	Glucocorticoid biosynthesis	Cortisol, the major human glucocorticoid, is synthesized in the zona fasciculata of the adrenal cortex from pregnenolone. Pregnenolone is converted to 17alpha-hydoxyprogesterone in two reactions, both catalyzed by 3-beta-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase/isomerase. 17Alpha-hydroxyprogesterone is hydroxylated by CYP21A2 to form 11-deoxycortisol, which in turn is converted to cortisol by CYP11B1. The conversion of the active steroid hormone, cortisol, to inactive cortisone occurs in many tissues, notably the liver (Payne and Hales 2004).
R-HSA-70263	Gluconeogenesis	The reactions of gluconeogenesis convert mitochondrial pyruvate to cytosolic glucose 6-phosphate which in turn can be hydrolyzed to glucose and exported from the cell. Gluconeogenesis is confined to cells of the liver and kidney and enables glucose synthesis from molecules such as lactate and alanine and other amino acids when exogenous glucose is not available (reviewed, e.g., by Gerich 1993). The process of gluconeogenesis as diagrammed below occurs in two parts: a network of reactions converts mitochondrial pyruvate to cytosolic phosphoenolpyruvate; then phosphoenolpyruvate is converted to glucose 6-phosphate in a single sequence of cytosolic reactions.<p>Three variants of the first part of the process are physiologically important. 1) A series of transport and transamination reactions convert mitochondrial oxaloacetate to cytosolic oxaloacetate which is converted to phosphoenolpyruvate by a hormonally regulated, cytosolic isoform of phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase. This variant allows regulated glucose synthesis from lactate. 2) Mitochondrial oxaloacetate is reduced to malate, which is exported to the cytosol and re-oxidized to oxaloacetate. This variant provides reducing equivalents to the cytosol, needed for glucose synthesis from amino acids such as alanine and glutamine. 3) Constitutively expressed mitochondrial phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase catalyzes the conversion of mitochondrial oxaloacetate to phosphoenolpyruvate which is then transported to the cytosol. The exact path followed by any one molecule of pyruvate through this reaction network is determined by the tissue in which the reactions are occurring, the source of the pyruvate, and the physiological stress that triggered gluconeogenesis.<p>In all cases, the synthesis of glucose from two molecules of pyruvate requires the generation and consumption of two reducing equivalents as cytosolic NADH + H+. For pyruvate derived from lactate (variants 1 and 3), NADH + H+ is generated with the oxidation of lactate to pyruvate in the cytosol (a reaction of pyruvate metabolism not shown in the diagram). For pyruvate derived from amino acids (variant 2), mitochondrial NADH + H+ generated by glutamate dehydrogenase (a reaction of amino acid metabolism, not shown) is used to reduce oxaloacetate to malate, which is transported to the cytosol and re-oxidized, generating cytosolic NADH + H+. The synthesis of glucose from pyruvate also requires the consumption of six high-energy phosphates, four from ATP and two from GTP.<p>In the second part of gluconeogenesis, cytosolic phosphoenolpyruvate, however derived, is converted to fructose 1,6-bisphosphate by reactions that are the reverse of steps of glycolysis. Hydrolysis of fructose 1,6-bisphosphate to fructose 6-phosphate is catalyzed by fructose 1,6-bisphosphatase, and fructose 6-phosphate is reversibly isomerized to glucose 6-phosphate.
R-HSA-70326	Glucose metabolism	Glucose is the major form in which dietary sugars are made available to cells of the human body. Its breakdown is a major source of energy for all cells, and is essential for the brain and red blood cells. Glucose utilization begins with its uptake by cells and conversion to glucose 6-phosphate, which cannot traverse the cell membrane. Fates open to cytosolic glucose 6-phosphate include glycolysis to yield pyruvate, glycogen synthesis, and the pentose phosphate pathway. In some tissues, notably the liver and kidney, glucose 6-phosphate can be synthesized from pyruvate by the pathway of gluconeogenesis.
R-HSA-70153	Glucose transport	Cells take up glucose by facilitated diffusion, via glucose transporters (GLUTs) associated with the plasma membrane, a reversible reaction (Joost and Thorens 2001). Four tissue-specific GLUT isoforms are known. Glucose in the cytosol is phosphorylated by tissue-specific kinases to yield glucose 6-phosphate, which cannot cross the plasma membrane because of its negative charge. In the liver, this reaction is catalyzed by glucokinase which has a low affinity for glucose (Km about 10 mM) but is not inhibited by glucose 6-phosphate. In other tissues, this reaction is catalyzed by isoforms of hexokinase. Hexokinases are feedback-inhibited by glucose 6-phosphate and have a high affinity for glucose (Km about 0.1 mM). Liver cells can thus accumulate large amounts of glucose 6-phosphate but only when blood glucose concentrations are high, while most other tissues can take up glucose even when blood glucose concentrations are low but cannot accumulate much intracellular glucose 6-phosphate. These differences are consistent with the view that that the liver functions to buffer blood glucose concentrations, while most other tissues take up glucose to meet immediate metabolic needs.<p>Glucose 6-phosphatase, expressed in liver and kidney, allows glucose 6-phosphate generated by gluconeogenesis (both tissues) and glycogen breakdown (liver) to leave the cell. The absence of glucose 6-phosphatase from other tissues makes glucose uptake by these tissues essentially irreversible, consistent with the view that cells in these tissues take up glucose for local metabolic use.
R-HSA-156588	Glucuronidation	Glucuronidation conjugation utilizes UDP-glucuronosyltransferases (UGTs; EC 2.4.1.17) to catalyze a wide range of diverse endogenous and xenobiotic compounds. Glucuronidation is the major pathway in phase II metabolism and accounts for approximately 35% of drug conjugation. UGTs are microsomal membrane-bound and catalyze the transfer of a glucuronate group of uridine diphosphoglucuronate (UDPGA, a co-substrate) to the functional group of specific substrates. UDPGA is synthesized from glucose-1-phosphate (G1P). G1P is required for glycolysis and is present in high concentrations in the cell, making it is unlikely to be a limiting factor in UDPGA synthesis. UDP is added to G1P to form UDP-glucose which is then dehydrogenated to form UDPGA. The basic reaction is<p><b>UDP-Glucuronate + acceptor -> UDP + acceptor-beta-D-glucuronide</b></p>The effect of this conjugation is to confer polarity to the substrate which can then be easily excreted in urine or bile. Functional groups acted on include hydroxyl, carboxylate, amino and sulfate groups. There are 2 families of UGTs, UGT1 and UGT2 which are further sub-divided into 3 subfamilies, UGT1A, UGT2A and UGT2B. There are more than 26 different isozymes in humans, of which 18 are functional proteins. They are composed of 527-530 residues and have a molecular weight of 50-57KDa.<br>The UGT1 family comprises of 9 proteins (UGT1A1, 1A3-1A10) but only 5 have been isolated in humans. Example substrates which are glucuronidated are acetaminophen by UGT1A6 and bilirubin by UGT1A1. Members of the UGT2 subfamily are each encoded by their own genes, in contrast to UGT1As which are encoded at the UGT1 locus. Example substrates are morphine conjugation by UGT2B7 and androgenic steroid conjugation by UGT2B17.<br>Xenobiotics conjugated with glucuronic acid can be substrates for beta-glucuronidase, an enzyme common in gut microflora. This enzyme can release the parent or phase I metabolite which can be reabsorbed. It can then either re-exert it's original effects or be conjugated by glucuronic acid again. This cycle is called <i>enterohepatic circulation</i> and can delay the elimination of the xenobiotic.
R-HSA-399721	Glutamate Binding, Activation of AMPA Receptors and Synaptic Plasticity	Excitatory synaptic transmission in the brain is carried out by glutamate receptors through the activation of both ionotropic and metabotropic receptors. Ionotropic glutamate receptors are of three subtypes based on distinct physiologic properties and their differential binding of exogenous ligands namely NMDA (N-methyl D-aspartate), AMPA (alpha-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methyl-4-isoxazolepropionic acid) and Kainate . The ionotropic receptors are glutamate gated ion channels that initiate signaling by influx of ions, and are comprised of subunits with distinct structures and distinguished based on their agonist binding. Even though all three types of receptors are found at the glutamatergic synapses yet they exhibit great diversity in the synaptic distribution. The metabotropic glutamate receptors are a family of G-protein coupled receptors that are slow acting. Fast excitatory synaptic transmission is carried out through AMPA receptors. Post-synaptic transmission involves binding of the ligand such as glutamate/AMPA to the AMPA receptor resulting in the Na influx which causes depolarization of the membrane. NMDA receptors are blocked by Mg at resting membrane potential. NMDA receptors are activated upon coincident depolarization and glutamate binding are activated following AMPA receptor activation.NMDA receptors are blocked by Mg at resting <br>membrane potential. NMDA receptors are Ca permeable and their activity leads to increase in Ca which, leads to upregulation of AMPA receptors at the synapse which causes the long lasting excitatory post-synaptic potential (EPSP) which forms the basis of long term potentiation (LTP). LTP is one form of synaptic plasticity wherein the strength of the synapses is enhanced by either change in the number, increase in the efficacy by phosphorylation or change in the type of receptors. Phosphorylation of AMPA receptors changes the localization of the receptors, increases the single channel conductance, and increases the probability of open channel. GluR1 has four phosphorylation sites; serine 818 (S818) is phosphorylated by PKC and is necessary for LTP, serine 831 (S831) is phosphorylated by CaMKII that increases the delivery of receptors to the synapse and also increased their single channel conductance, threonine (T840) is implicated in LTP. Serine 845 (S845) is phosphorylated by PKA which regulates open channel probability. Long term depression is another form of plasticity wherein the number of AMPA receptors is diminished by either phosphorylation of GluR2 at Ser880 or dephosphorylation of GluR1 by protein phosphatase1, protein phosphatase 2A and protein phosphatase 2B (calcineurin).
R-HSA-210500	Glutamate Neurotransmitter Release Cycle	Communication at the synapse involves the release of glutamate from the presynaptic neuron and its binding to glutamate receptors on the postsynaptic cell to generate a series of events that lead to propagation of the synaptic transmission. This process begins with the formation of synaptic vesicles in the presynaptic neuron, proceeds to the loading of glutamate into the vesicles, and concludes with the release of glutamate into the synaptic cleft.<br><br>The glutamate life cycle in the neuron begins with the loading of the nascent synaptic vesicles with cytosolic glutamate with the help the transporter protein, VGLUT1, located in the synaptic vesicular membrane. Glutamate loaded vesicles are formed in the cytoplasm and then transported to a site close to the plasma membrane where the vesicle is docked with the help of several proteins. One of the key players in the docking process in Munc 18, which interacts with syntaxin (in the plasma membrane), MINT (Munc18 interacting molecule), and DOC2. These interactions along with the secondary interactions are needed for docking the synaptic vesicle to the plasma membrane.<br><br><br>The docked synaptic vesicle is not ready for release until it undergoes molecular changes to prime it for fusion with the plasma membrane. Munc13 is one of the main players in the priming process. Munc 13 interacts with RIM (Rab3A interacting molecule) located in the synaptic vesicle. Munc 13 also interacts with DOC2. The precise molecular mechanisms of the interactions that result in docking versus priming are not clear and the docking and priming process have been combined in this annotation of this pathway. Once primed the synaptic vesicle is ready for release.<br><br><br>Synaptic transmission involves an action potential that is generated in the presynaptic cell which induces the opening of voltage gated Ca2+ channels (VGCC) located in the plasma membrane of the presynaptic neuron. Typically N, P/Q and R type of VGCCs are involved in the neurotransmitter release. Ca2+ influx through these channels results in the rise of intracellular Ca2+ concentration. In the microdomain of glutamatergic synapses, the Ca2+ concentration could rise between 10-25 micro molar. Synaptotagmin, a Ca2+-binding protein located in the synaptic vesicular membrane, responds to the rise in the Ca2+ levels in the microdomain and induces a synaptic vesicle membrane curvature that favors vesicle fusion. Fusion of the synaptic vesicle with the plasma membrane is characterized by the formation of a trimeric trans-SNARE complex that involves VAMP2 from the synaptic vesicle membrane, and syntaxin and SNAP-25 from plasma membrane. Vesicle fusion incorporates the synaptic vesicle membrane into the plasma membrane, releasing the vesicle contents (glutamate) into the synaptic cleft. Postfusion the synaptic vesicle membrane proteins (VAMP2, Rab3A, VGLUT1, and synaptotagmin) are also found in the plasma membrane.
R-HSA-156590	Glutathione conjugation	Glutathione S-Transferases (GSTs; EC 2.5.1.18) are another major set of phase II conjugation enzymes. They can be found in the cytosol as well as being microsomal membrane-bound. Cytosolic GSTs are encoded by at least 5 gene families (alpha, mu, pi, theta and zeta GST) whereas membrane-bound enzymes are encoded by single genes. Soluble GSTs are homo- or hetero-dimeric enzymes (approximately 25KDa subunits) which can act on a wide range of endogenous and exogenous electrophiles. GSTs mediate conjugation using glutathione (GSH), a tripeptide synthesized from its precursor amino acids gamma-glutamate, cysteine and glycine. A generalized reaction is<p><b>RX + GSH -> HX + GSR</b></p>Glutathione conjugates are excreted in bile and converted to cysteine and mercapturic acid conjugates in the intestine and kidneys. GSH is the major, low molecular weight, non-protein thiol synthesized <i>de novo</i> in mammalian cells. As well as taking part in conjugation reactions, GSH also has antioxidant ability and can metabolize endogenous and exogenous compounds. The nucleophilic GSH attacks the electrophilic substrate forming a thioether bond between the cysteine residue of GSH and the electrophile. The result is generally a less reactive and more water-soluble conjugate that can be easily excreted. In some cases, GSTs can activate compounds to reactive species such as certain haloalkanes and haloalkenes. Substrates for GSTs include epoxides, alkenes and compounds with electrophilic carbon, sulfur or nitrogen centres. There are two types of conjugation reaction with glutathione: <i>displacement reactions</i> where glutathione displaces an electron-withdrawing group and <i>addition reactions</i> where glutathione is added to activated double bond structures or strained ring systems.
R-HSA-174403	Glutathione synthesis and recycling	The combination of glutamate, cysteine and ATP is required to form glutathione. The steps involved in the synthesis and recycling of glutathione are outlined (Meister, 1988).
R-HSA-1483206	Glycerophospholipid biosynthesis	Glycerophospholipids are important structural and functional components of biological membranes and constituents of serum lipoproteins and the pulmonary surfactant. In addition, glycerophospholipids act as precursors of lipid mediators such as platelet-activating factor and eicosanoids. Cellular membranes contains a distinct composition of various glycerophospholipids such as phosphatidic acid (PA), phosphatidylcholine (PC), phosphatidylethanolamine (PE), phosphatidylserine (PS), phosphatidylglycerol (PG), phosphatidylinositol (PI), cardiolipin (CL), lysophosphatidic acid (LPA) and lysobisphosphatidic acid (also known as bis(monoacylglycerol) hydrogen phosphate - BMP).<br><br>Glycerophospholipids are first formed by the <i>de novo</i> (Kennedy) pathway using fatty acids activated as acyl-CoA donors. However, the acyl groups of glycerophospholipids are highly diverse and distributed in an asymmetric manner. Saturated and monounsaturated fatty acids are usually esterified at the <i>sn-1</i> position, whereas polyunsaturated acyl groups are esterified at the <i>sn-2</i> position. Subsequent acyl chain remodeling (Lands cycle) generates the diverse glycerophospholipid composition and asymmetry characteristic of cell membranes.<br><br>In the <i>de novo</i> pathway of glycerophospholipid biosynthesis, lysophosphatidic acid (LPA) is initially formed from glycerol 3-phosphate (G3P). Next, LPA is converted to PA by a LPA acyltransferase (AGPAT, also known as LPAAT), then PA is metabolized into two types of glycerol derivatives. The first is diacylglycerol (DAG) which is converted to triacylglycerol (TAG), PC, and PE. Subsequently, PS is synthesized from PC or PE. The second is cytidine diphosphate-diacylglycerol (CDP-DAG), which is processed into PI, PG, CL, and BMP. Each glycerophospholipid is involved in acyl chain remodeling via cleavage by phospholipases followed by reacylation by an acyltransferase.<br><br>Most of the glycerophospholipids are synthesized at the endoplasmic reticulum (ER), however, some, most notably cardiolipin, and BMP are synthesized in the mitochondrial and endosomal membranes respectively. Since the most of the glycerophospholipids are found in all membrane compartments, there must be extensive network of transport of glycerophospholipids from one membrane compartment to another via various mechanisms including diffusion through the cytosol, formation of transportation complexes, and diffusion via membrane contact sites (MCS) (Osman et al. 2011, Lebiedzinska et al. 2009, Lev 2010, Scherer & Schmitz 2011, Orso et al. 2011, Hermansson et al. 2011, Vance & Vance 2008).
R-HSA-6783984	Glycine degradation	The simplest amino acid, glycine, is catabolised by several different pathways. The major pathway is via the glycine cleavage system, comprising dimeric P protein (GLDC), T protein (AMT, GCST), dimeric L protein (DLD) and H protein (GCSH) (Kikuchi et al. 2008).
R-HSA-70221	Glycogen breakdown (glycogenolysis)	Cytosolic glycogen breakdown occurs via the same chemical steps in all tissues but is separately regulated via tissue specific isozymes and signaling pathways that enable distinct physiological fates for liver glycogen and that in other tissues. Glycogen phosphorylase, which can be activated by phosphorylase kinase, catalyzes the removal of glucose residues as glucose 1-phosphate from the ends of glycogen branches. The final four residues of each branch are removed in two steps catalyzed by debranching enzyme, and further glycogen phosphorylase activity completes the process of glycogen breakdown. The figure shows the actions of phosphorylase and debranching enzyme. The first glucose residue in each branch is released as free glucose; all other residues are released as glucose 1-phosphate. The latter molecule can be converted to glucose 6-phosphate in a step shared with other pathways (Villar-Palasi and Larner 1970; Hers 1976).<p>Glycogen can also be taken up into lysosomes, where it is normally broken done by the action of a single enzyme, lysosomal alpha-glucosidase (GAA).
R-HSA-3858516	Glycogen storage disease type 0 (liver GYS2)	Glycogen synthase 2 (GYS2 "liver") normally catalyzes the addition of glucose residues to a growing glycogen molecule. In its absence, glycogen synthesis fails. Expression of GYS2 is confined to the liver and its deficiency is most prominently associated with fasting hypoglycemia (Gitzelmann et al. 1996; Orho et al. 1998).
R-HSA-3828062	Glycogen storage disease type 0 (muscle GYS1)	Glycogen synthase 1 (GYS1 "muscle") is widely expressed in the body. It normally catalyzes the addition of glucose residues to a growing glycogen molecule. In its absence, glycogen synthesis fails. This deficiency is most prominently associated with exercise intolerance and cardiomyopathy (Kolberg et al. 2007; Cameron et al. 2009).
R-HSA-3274531	Glycogen storage disease type Ia (G6PC)	Glucose-6-phosphatase (G6PC) associated with the inner face of the endoplasmic reticulum membrane normally catalyzes the hydrolysis of glucose-6-phosphate to glucose and orthophosphate. Defects in glucose-6-phosphatase are the cause of glycogen storage disease type Ia (Lei et al. 1993, 1995, Chou and Mansfield 2008).
R-HSA-3229133	Glycogen storage disease type Ib (SLC37A4)	The SLC37A4 transport protein in the endoplasmic reticulum membrane normally mediates the exchange of cytosolic glucose-6-phosphate and orthophosphate from the endoplasmic reticulum lumen. Defects in this transporter are associated with glycogen storage disease type Ib (Gerin et al. 1997; Chen et al. 2008; Veiga-da-Cunha et al. 1998).
R-HSA-5357609	Glycogen storage disease type II (GAA)	Glycogen storage disease type II (GSD II - Pompe's disease) is caused by mutations that reduce or eliminate the activity of lysosomal alpha-glucosidase (GAA) (Hers 1963). The presentation of GSD II varies with the severity of the mutation: patients with little or no GAA activity are affected shortly after birth and multiple tissues - heart, liver, and skeletal muscle - are severely affected. Patients with higher levels of GAA activity present later in life, often with symptoms restricted to skeletal muscle (Leslie & Tinkle). At a cellular level, symptoms of the disease are due to accumulation of structurally normal glycogen in lysosomes. Glycogen, thought to enter lysosomes via autophagy, is fully degraded by GAA (Brown et al. 1970), but accumulates if the enzyme is absent or reduced in activity.<p>The two mutant alleles annotated here are associated with near-complete loss of enzyme activity and early onset of disease (Hermans et al. 1991; Zhong et al. 1991). Many other mutant alleles have been described and their residual activities correlated with disease presentation (e.g., Kroos et al. 2012).
R-HSA-3878781	Glycogen storage disease type IV (GBE1)	Normally, cytosolic glycogen branching enzyme (GBE1) associated with glycogen granules transfers terminal alpha(1,4) glucose blocks to form alpha(1,6) branches on growing glycogen molecules of both liver and muscle types. In the absence of GBE1 activity, abnormal amylopectin-like glycogen with longer alpha(1,4) chains and fewer branch points forms in all tissues where glycogen is normally found. Presentation of the disease is clinically heterogeneous: missense and nonsense mutations associated with little or no enzyme activity can lead to progressive liver disease or neuromuscuolar disease (Bao et al. 1996; Bruno et al. 2004).
R-HSA-3814836	Glycogen storage disease type XV (GYG1)	Glycogen synthesis is normally initiated by the autoglycosylation of glycogenin (GYG) to form oligo (1,4)-alpha-D-glucosyl GYG. A missense mutation of GYG1 yields a protein that cannot undergo glucosylation, leading to failure of glycogen synthesis, associated with muscle weakness and other abnormalities (Moslemi et al. 2010).
R-HSA-3229121	Glycogen storage diseases	The regulated turnover of glycogen plays a central, tissue-specific role in the maintenance of blood glucose levels and in the provision of glucose to tissues such as muscle and brain in response to stress. Defects in the enzymes involved in glycogen turnover are associated with abnormal responses to fasting and exercise that can differ widely in their presentation and severity. Additional symptoms can be the result of accumulation of abnormal products of glycogen metabolism (Hauk et al. 1959; Hers 1964; Shin 2006). Annotations are provided here for diseases due to deficiencies of GYS1 and GYS1 (glycogen synthase 1 and 2; glycogen storage disease type 0 (GSD type 0), of G6PC (glucose-6-phosphatase, GSD type Ia) and the SLC37A4 transporter (GSD type Ib), of GAA (lysosomal acid alpha-glucosidase, GSD type II), of GBE1 (glycogen branching enzyme, GSD type IV), and of GYG1 (glycogenin 1, GSD XV). Two additional diseases, myoclonic epilepsy of Lafora (Roach et al. 2012) and severe congenital neutropenia type 4 (Boztug et al. 2009), are included as they are due to defects in enzymes of glycogen metabolism.
R-HSA-3322077	Glycogen synthesis	Glycogen, a highly branched glucose polymer, is formed and broken down in most human tissues, but is most abundant in liver and muscle, where it serves as a major stored fuel. Glycogen metabolism has been studied in most detail in muscle, although considerable experimental data are available concerning these reactions in liver as well. Glycogen metabolism in other tissues has not been studied as extensively, and is thought to resemble the muscle process. Glycogen synthesis involves five reactions. The first two, conversion of glucose 6-phosphate to glucose 1-phosphate and synthesis of UDP-glucose from glucose 1-phosphate and UTP, are shared with several other pathways. The next three reactions, the auto-catalyzed synthesis of a glucose oligomer on glycogenin, the linear extension of the glucose oligomer catalyzed by glycogen synthase, and the formation of branches catalyzed by glycogen branching enzyme, are unique to glycogen synthesis. Repetition of the last two reactions generates large, extensively branched glycogen polymers. The catalysis of glycogenin glucosylation and oligoglucose chain extension by distinct isozymes in liver and nonhepatic tissues allows them to be regulated independently (Agius 2008; Bollen et al. 1998; Roach et al. 2012).
R-HSA-70171	Glycolysis	The reactions of glycolysis (e.g., van Wijk and van Solinge 2005) convert glucose 6-phosphate to pyruvate. The entire process is cytosolic. Glucose 6-phosphate is reversibly isomerized to form fructose 6-phosphate. Phosphofructokinase 1 catalyzes the physiologically irreversible phosphorylation of fructose 6-phosphate to form fructose 1,6-bisphosphate. In six reversible reactions, fructose 1,6-bisphosphate is converted to two molecules of phosphoenolpyruvate and two molecules of NAD+ are reduced to NADH + H+. Each molecule of phosphoenolpyruvate reacts with ADP to form ATP and pyruvate in a physiologically irreversible reaction. Under aerobic conditions the NADH +H+ can be reoxidized to NAD+ via electron transport to yield additional ATP, while under anaerobic conditions or in cells lacking mitochondria NAD+ can be regenerated via the reduction of pyruvate to lactate.
R-HSA-209822	Glycoprotein hormones	More complex protein hormones have carbohydrate side chains and are called glycoprotein hormones. Hormones in this class are Follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH; follitropin), Luteinizing hormone (LH), Thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH; thyrotropin) and human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG). The alpha subunit of glycoprotein hormones is a 92 aa peptide and serves as the alpha subunit for FSH, LH, hCG and TSH (Fiddes JC and Goodman HM, 1981). The beta subunits for these hormones are unique and confer biological specificity to them. These two subunits combine via disulphide bonding to produce the mature glycoprotein hormone dimer.
R-HSA-1630316	Glycosaminoglycan metabolism	Glycosaminoglycans (GAGs) are long, unbranched polysaccharides containing a repeating disaccharide unit composed of a hexosamine (either N-acetylgalactosamine (GalNAc) or N-acetylglucosamine (GlcNAc)) and a uronic acid (glucuronate or iduronate). They can be heavily sulfated. GAGs are located primarily in the extracellular matrix (ECM) and on cell membranes, acting as a lubricating fluid for joints and as part of signalling processes. They have structural roles in connective tissue, cartilage, bone and blood vessels (Esko et al. 2009). GAGs are degraded in the lysosome as part of their natural turnover. Defects in the lysosomal enzymes responsible for the metabolism of membrane-associated GAGs lead to lysosomal storage diseases called mucopolysaccharidoses (MPS). MPSs are characterised by the accumulation of GAGs in lysosomes resulting in chronic, progressively debilitating disorders that in many instances lead to severe psychomotor retardation and premature death (Cantz & Gehler 1976, Clarke 2008). The biosynthesis and breakdown of the main GAGs (hyaluronate, keratan sulfate, chondroitin sulfate, dermatan sulfate and heparan sulfate) is described here.
R-HSA-1660662	Glycosphingolipid metabolism	The steps involved in the synthesis of glycosphingolipids (sphingolipids with one or more sugars attached) are annotated here (Gault et al. 2010).
R-HSA-389661	Glyoxylate metabolism and glycine degradation	Glyoxylate is generated in the course of glycine and hydroxyproline catabolism and can be converted to oxalate. In humans, this process takes place in the liver. Defects in two enzymes of glyoxylate metabolism, alanine:glyoxylate aminotransferase (AGXT) and glycerate dehydrogenase/glyoxylate reductase (GRHPR), are associated with pathogenic overproduction of oxalate (Danpure 2005). The reactions that interconvert glycine, glycolate, and glyoxylate and convert glyoxylate to oxalate have been characterized in molecular detail in humans. A reaction sequence for the conversion of hydroxyproline to glyoxylate has been inferred from studies of partially purified extracts of rat and bovine liver but the enzymes involved in the corresponding human reactions have not been identified.
R-HSA-432722	Golgi Associated Vesicle Biogenesis	Proteins that have been synthesized, processed and sorted eventually reach the final steps of the secretory pathway. This pathway is responsible not only for proteins that are secreted from the cell but also enzymes and other resident proteins in the lumen of the ER, Golgi, and lysosomes as well as integral proteins transported in the vesicle membranes.
R-HSA-162658	Golgi Cisternae Pericentriolar Stack Reorganization	The pericentriolar stacks of Golgi cisternae undergo extensive fragmentation and reorganization in mitosis.<br> <br>In mammalian cells, Golgi apparatus consists of stacked cisternae that are connected by tubules to form a ribbon-like structure in the perinuclear region, in vicinity of the centrosome. Reorganization of the Golgi apparatus during cell division allows both daughter cells to inherit this organelle, and may play additional roles in the organization of the mitotic spindle. <br> <br>First changes in the structure of the Golgi apparatus likely start in G2 and are subtle, involving unlinking of the Golgi ribbon into separate stacks. These changes are required for the entry of mammalian cells into mitosis (Sutterlin et al. 2002). This initial unlinking of the Golgi ribbon depends on GRASP proteins and on CTBP1 (BARS) protein, which induces the cleavage of the tubular membranes connecting the stacks (Hidalgo Carcedo et al. 2004, Colanzi et al. 2007), but the exact mechanism is not known. Activation of MEK1/2 also contributes to unlinking of the Golgi ribbon in G2 (Feinstein and Linstedt 2007). <br> <br>From prophase to metaphase, Golgi cisternae undergo extensive fragmentation that is a consequence of unstacking of Golgi cisternae and cessation of transport through Golgi. At least three mitotic kinases, CDK1, PLK1 and MEK1, regulate these changes. CDK1 in complex with cyclin B phosphorylates GOLGA2 (GM130) and GORASP1 (GRASP65), constituents of a cis-Golgi membrane complex (Lowe et al. 1998, Preisinger et al. 2005). Phosphorylation of GOLGA2 prevents binding of USO1 (p115), a protein localizing to the membrane of ER (endoplasmic reticulum) to Golgi transport vesicles and cis-Golgi, thereby impairing fusion of these vesicles with cis-Golgi cisternae and stopping ER to Golgi transport (Lowe et al. 1998, Seeman et al. 2000, Moyer et al. 2001). Phosphorylation of GORASP1 by CDK1 enables further phosphorylation of GORASP1 by PLK1 (Sutterlin et al. 2001, Preisinger et al. 2005). Phosphorylation of GORASP1 by CDK1 and PLK1 impairs stacking of Golgi cisternae by interfering with formation of GORASP1 trans-oligomers that would normally link the Golgi cisternae together (Wang et al. 2003, Wang et al. 2005, Sengupta and Linstedt 2010). <br><br> In the median Golgi, GORASP2 (GRASP55), a protein that forms a complex with BLFZ1 (Golgin-45) and RAB2A GTPase and contributes to cisternae stacking and Golgi trafficking (Short et al. 2001), is also phosphorylated in mitosis. Phosphorylation of GORASP2 by MEK1/2-activated MAPK1 (ERK2) and/or MAPK3-3 (ERK1b in human, Erk1c in rat) contributes to Golgi unlinking in G2 and fragmentation of Golgi cisternae in mitotic prophase (Acharya et al. 1998, Jesch et al. 2001, Colanzi et al. 2003, Shaul and Seger 2006, Duran et al. 2008, Feinstein and Linstedt 2007, Feinstein and Linstedt 2008, Xiang and Wang 2010). 
R-HSA-199983	Golgi to ER Retrograde Transport	The anterograde membrane flow from the ER to the Golgi is compensated for by a retrograde pathway. This pathway's functions include the recycling of membrane and proteins to the ER.
R-HSA-430116	GP1b-IX-V activation signalling	The platelet GPIb complex (GP1b-IX-V) together with GPVI are primarily responsible for regulating the initial adhesion of platelets to the damaged blood vessel and platelet activation. The importance of GPIb is demonstrated by the bleeding problems in patients with Bernard-Soulier syndrome where this receptor is either absent or defective. GP1b-IX-V binds von Willebrand Factor (vWF) to resting platelets, particularly under conditions of high shear stress. This transient interaction is the first stage of the vascular repair process. Activation of GP1b-IX-V on exposure of the fibrous matrix following atherosclerotic plaque rupture, or in occluded arteries, is a major contributory factor leading to thrombus formation leading to heart attack or stroke. GpIb also binds thrombin (Yamamoto et al. 1986), at a site distinct from the site of vWF binding, acting as a docking site for thrombin which then activates Proteinase Activated Receptors leading to enhanced platelet activation (Dormann et al. 2000).
R-HSA-388396	GPCR downstream signaling	G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) are classically defined as the receptor, G-protein and downstream effectors, the alpha subunit of the G-protein being the primary signaling molecule. However, it has become clear that this greatly oversimplifies the complexities of GPCR signaling (see Gurevich & Gurevich, 2008). The beta:gamma G-protein dimer is also involved in downstream signaling (Smrcka, 2008), and some receptors form part of metastable complexes of receptor and accessory proteins such as the arrestins. GPCRs are involved in many diverse signaling events (Kristiansen 2004), using a variety of pathways that include modulation of adenylyl cyclase, phospholipase C, the mitogen activated protein kinases (MAPKs), extracellular signal regulated kinase (ERK) c-Jun-NH2-terminal kinase (JNK) and p38 MAPK. 
R-HSA-500792	GPCR ligand binding	There are more than 800 G-protein coupled receptor (GPCRs) in the human genome, making it the largest receptor superfamily. GPCRs are also the largest class of drug targets, involved in virtually all physiological processes (Frederiksson 2003). GPCRs are receptors for a diverse range of ligands from large proteins to photons (Kristiansen et al. 2004) and have an equal diversity of ligand-binding mechanisms (Gether et al. 2002). Classical GPCR signaling involves signal transduction via heterotrimeric G-proteins, however many G-protein independent mechanisms have been reported. 
R-HSA-114604	GPVI-mediated activation cascade	The GPVI receptor is a complex of the GPVI protein with Fc epsilon R1 gamma (FcR). The Src family kinases Fyn and Lyn constitutively associate with the GPVI-FcR complex in platelets and initiate platelet activation through phosphorylation of the immunoreceptor tyrosine-based activation motif (ITAM) in the FcR gamma chain, leading to binding and activation of the tyrosine kinase Syk. Downstream of Syk, a series of adapter molecules and effectors lead to platelet activation. <br><br>The GPVI receptor signaling cascade is similar to that of T- and B-cell immune receptors, involving the formation of a signalosome composed of adapter and effector proteins. At the core of the T-cell receptor signalosome is the transmembrane adapter LAT and two cytosolic adapters SLP-76 and Gads. While LAT is essential for signalling to PLCgamma1 downstream of the T-cell receptor, the absence of LAT in platelets only impairs the activation of PLCgamma2, the response to collagen and GPVI receptor ligands remains sufficient to elicit a full aggregation response. In contrast, GPVI signalling is almost entirely abolished in the absence of SLP-76.
R-HSA-179812	GRB2 events in EGFR signaling	Autophosphorylated EGFR tyrosine residues are docking sites for many downstream effectors in EGFR signaling. The adaptor protein GRB2 binds to phosphotyrosine residues in the C-tail of EGFR through its SH2 domain. GRB2 is constitutively associated with SOS, a guanine nucleotide exchange factor of RAS. GRB2 binding to phosphorylated EGFR results in the recruitment of SOS to the plasma membrane where it comes in proximity to RAS. This mechanism has been seen to be the model for RAS activation.
R-HSA-1963640	GRB2 events in ERBB2 signaling	ERBB2:EGFR and ERBB2:ERBB4 can directly recruit GRB2:SOS1 complex through phosphorylated C-tail tyrosines of EGFR (Y1068 and Y1086) and ERBB2 (Y1139) that serve as docking sites for GRB2 (Xie et al. 1995, Sepp-Lorenzino et al. 1996), which, again, results in SOS1-mediated guanyl-nucleotide exchange on RAS and activation of RAF and MAP kinases (Janes et al. 1994, Sepp-Lorenzino et al. 1996).
R-HSA-354194	GRB2:SOS provides linkage to MAPK signaling for Integrins 	Integrin signaling is linked to the MAP kinase pathway by recruiting Grb2 to the FADK1/SRC activation complex.
R-HSA-1306955	GRB7 events in ERBB2 signaling	Heterodimers of ERBB2 and ERBB3 are able to bind GRB7 (Fiddes et al. 1998) through phosphorylated tyrosine residues in the C-tail of ERBB3 (Y1199 and Y1262), but the exact downstream signaling of this complex has not been elucidated.
R-HSA-982772	Growth hormone receptor signaling	Growth hormone (Somatotropin or GH) is a key factor in determining lean body mass, stimulating the growth and metabolism of muscle, bone and cartilage cells, while reducing body fat. It has many other roles; it acts to regulate cell growth, differentiation, apoptosis, and reorganisation of the cytoskeleton, affecting diverse processes such as cardiac function, immune function, brain function, and aging. GH also has insulin-like effects such as stimulating amino acid transport, protein synthesis, glucose transport, and lipogenesis. The growth hormone receptor (GHR) is a a member of the cytokine receptor family. When the dimeric receptor binds GH it undergoes a conformational change which leads to phosphorylation of key tyrosine residues in its cytoplasmic domains and activation of associated tyrosine kinase JAK2. This leads to recruitment of signaling molecules such as STAT5 and Src family kinases such as Lyn leading to ERK activation. The signal is attenuated by association of Suppressor of Cytokine Signaling (SOCS) proteins and SHP phosphatases which bind to or dephosphorylate specific phosphorylated tyrosines on GHR/JAK. The availability of GHR on the cell surface is regulated by at least two processes; internalization and cleavage from the suface by metalloproteases.
R-HSA-72706	GTP hydrolysis and joining of the 60S ribosomal subunit	Hydrolysis of eIF2-GTP occurs after the Met-tRNAi has recognized the AUG. This reaction is catalyzed by eIF5 (or eIF5B) and is thought to cause dissociation of all other initiation factors and allow joining of the large 60S ribosomal subunit. The 60S subunit joins - a reaction catalyzed by eIF5 or eIF5B - resulting in a translation-competent 80S ribosome. Following 60S subunit joining, eIF5B hydrolyzes its GTP and is released from the 80S ribosome, which is now ready to start elongating the polypeptide chain.
R-HSA-3214847	HATs acetylate histones	Histone acetyltransferases (HATs) involved in histone modifications are referred to as A-type or nuclear HATs. They can be grouped into at least four families based on sequence conservation within the HAT domain: Gcn5/PCAF, MYST, p300/CBP and Rtt109. The p300/CBP and Rtt109 families are specific to metazoans and fungi respectively (Marmorstein & Trievel 2009). Gcn5/PCAF and MYST family members have no significant sequence homology but share a globular alpha/beta fold with a common structure involved in acetyl-Coenzyme A (ACA) binding. Both use a conserved glutamate residue for the acetyl transfer reaction but may not share a common catalytic mechanism (Trievel et al. 1999, Tanner et al. 1999, Yan et al. 2002, Berndsen et al. 2007). The p300/CBP HAT domain has no homology with the other families but some structural conservation within theACA-binding core (Liu et al. 2008). In addition to histone acetylation, members of all 3 human HAT families have been shown to acetylate non-histones (Glozak et al. 2005). <br><br>HATs and histone deacetylase (HDAC) enzymes generally act not alone but as part of multiprotein complexes. There are numerous examples in which subunits of HAT or HDAC complexes influence their substrate specificity and lysine preference, which in turn, affect the broader functions of these enzymes (Shahbazian & Grunstein 2007).<br><br> N.B. The coordinates of post-translational modifications represented and described here follow UniProt standard practice whereby coordinates refer to the translated protein before any further processing. Histone literature typically refers to coordinates of the protein after the initiating methionine has been removed. Therefore the coordinates of post-translated residues in the Reactome database and described here are frequently +1 when compared with the literature. 
R-HSA-1296061	HCN channels	Hyperpolarization-activated and cyclic nucleotide gated (HCN) channel are activated by membrane hyperpolarization and cAMP binding. HCN channels are homotetramers of four subunits HCN1-4. HCN channels conduct Na and K current with a permeability of 1:4. The current flowing through HCN channels is call funny current. HCN channels are involved in controlling the rhythmic activity of pacemaker current in autorythymic cells in heart and neuronal processes such as dendritic integration and synaptic transmission.
R-HSA-3214815	HDACs deacetylate histones	Lysine deacetylases (KDACs), historically referred to as histone deacetylases (HDACs), are divided into the Rpd3/Hda1 metal-dependent 'classical HDAC family' (de Ruijter et al. 2003, Verdin et al. 2003) and the unrelated sirtuins (Milne & Denu 2008). Phylogenetic analysis divides human KDACs into four classes (Gregoretti et al. 2004): Class I includes HDAC1, 2, 3 and 8; Class IIa includes HDAC4, 5, 7 and 9; Class IIb includes HDAC6 and 10; Class III are the sirtuins (SIRT1-7); Class IV has one member, HDAC11 (Gao et al. 2002). Class III enzymes use an NAD+ cofactor to perform deacetylation (Milne & Denu 2008, Yang & Seto 2008), the others classes use a metal-dependent mechanism (Gregoretti et al. 2004) to catalyze the hydrolysis of acetyl-L-lysine side chains in histone and non-histone proteins yielding L-lysine and acetate. X-ray crystal structures are available for four human HDACs; these structures have conserved active site residues, suggesting a common catalytic mechanism (Lombardi et al. 2011). They require a single transition metal ion and are typically studied in vitro as Zn2+-containing enzymes, though in vivo HDAC8 exhibits increased activity when substituted with Fe2+ (Gantt et al. 2006). The structurally-related enzyme acetylpolyamine amidohydrolase (APAH) (Leipe & Landsman 1997) exhibits optimal activity with Mn2+, followed closely by Zn2+ (Sakurada et al. 1996).<br><br>HDACs are often part of multi-protein transcriptional complexes that are recruited to gene promoters, regulating transcription without direct DNA binding. With the exception of HDAC8, all class I members can be catalytic subunits of multiprotein complexes (Yang & Seto 2008). HDAC1 and HDAC2 interact to form the catalytic core of several multisubunit complexes including Sin3, nucleosome remodeling deacetylase (NuRD) and corepressor of REST (CoREST) complexes (Grozinger & Schreiber 2002). HDAC3 is part of the silencing mediator of retinoic acid and thyroid hormone receptor (SMRT) complex or the homologous nuclear receptor corepressor (NCoR) (Li et al. 2000, Wen et al. 2000, Zhang et al. 2002, Yoon et al. 2003, Oberoi et al. 2011) which are involved in a wide range of processes including metabolism, inflammation, and circadian rhythms (Mottis et al. 2013). <br><br>Class IIa HDACs (HDAC4, -5, -7, and -9) shuttle between the nucleus and cytoplasm (Yang & Seto 2008, Haberland et al. 2009). The nuclear export of class IIa HDACs requires phosphorylation stimulated by calcium or other stimuli. They appear to have been evolutionarily inactivated as enzymes, having acquired a histidine substitution of the tyrosine residue in the active site of the mammalian deacetylase domain (H976 in humans) (Lahm et al. 2007, Schuetz et al. 2008). Instead they function as transcriptional corepressors for the MEF2 family of transcription factors (Yang & Gregoire 2005) .<br><br>Histones are the primary substrate for most HDACs except HDAC6 which is predominantly cytoplasmic and acts on alpha-tublin (Hubbert et al. 2002, Zhang et al. 2003, Boyault et al. 2007). HDACs also deacetylate proteins such as p53, E2F1, RelA, YY1, TFIIE, BCL6 and TFIIF (Glozak et al. 2005).<br><br>Histone deacetylases are targeted by structurally diverse compounds known as HDAC inhibitors (HDIs) (Marks et al. 2000). These can induce cytodifferentiation, cell cycle arrest and apoptosis of transformed cells (Marks et al. 2000, Bolden et al. 2006). Some HDIs have significant antitumor activity (Marks and Breslow 2007, Ma et al. 2009) and at least two are approved anti-cancer drugs.<br><br>The coordinates of post-translational modifications represented and described here follow UniProt standard practice whereby coordinates refer to the translated protein before any further processing. Histone literature typically refers to coordinates of the protein after the initiating methionine has been removed. Therefore the coordinates of post-translated residues in the Reactome database and described here are frequently +1 when compared with the literature.
R-HSA-194223	HDL-mediated lipid transport	HDL particles play a central role in the reverse transport of cholesterol, the process by which cholesterol in tissues other than the liver is returned to the liver for conversion to bile salts and excretion from the body and provided to tissues such as the adrenals and gonads for steroid hormone synthesis (Tall et al. 2008).<p>HDL particles are heterogeneous and can be fractionated into sub-populations based on their electrophoretic mobility, their density, or their content of various apolipoproteins. Sub-populations yielded by any one fractionation strategy, however, remain heterogeneous with respect to the other two parameters (Kontush and Chapman 2006). All HDL particles share two key features: they are assembled on a protein scaffold provided by apolipoprotein A-I (apoA-I), and they are recycled to allow a net flow of lipids from peripheral tissues to the liver and steroidogenic tissues while allowing apoA-I molecules to be re-used.<p>The HDL life cycle annotated here does not capture the full complexity of HDL structure and function but rather is an attempt to outline the key steps by which HDL particles assemble and transfer their lipid content. These steps include the assembly of nascent (discoidal) HDL particles on newly synthesized apoA-I, a process that in the body occurs primarily in the liver, the loading of discoidal HDL with additional lipid through interaction with cells carrying excess cholesterol (transformation to spherical HDL), the conversion of HDL-associated cholesterol to cholesterol esters (remodeling of spherical HDL), the transfer of HDL lipids to target cells with the regeneration of pre-beta HDL (lipid-poor apoA-I), and the conversion of pre-beta HDL to discoidal HDL to complete the cycle. Additional reactions provide houekeeping functions needed for the efficient operation of the cycle: binding and release of CETP, dispersal of byproducts of the CETP reaction, and export and degradation of excess apoA-I protein. Finally, the function of torcetrapib as an inhibitor of CETP function is annotated.
R-HSA-3214842	HDMs demethylate histones	Histone lysine demethylases (KDMs) are able to reverse N-methylations of histones and probably other proteins. To date KDMs have been demonstrated to catalyse demethylation of N-epsilon methylated lysine residues. Biochemically there are two distinct groups of N-epsilon methylated lysine demethylases with different catalytic mechanisms, both of which result in methyl group oxidation to produce formaldhyde. KDM1A, formerly known as Lysine Specific Demethylase 1 (LSD1), belongs to the flavin adenine dinucleotide (FAD)-dependent amino oxidase family. The KDM1A reaction mechanism requires a protonatable lysine epsilon-amine group, not available in trimethylated lysines, which consequently are not KDM1 substrates. Other KDMs belong to the Jumonji C (JmjC) -domain containing family. These are members of the Cupin superfamily of mononuclear Fe (II)-dependent oxygenases, which are characterised by the presence of a double-stranded beta-helix core fold. They require 2-oxoglutarate (2OG) and molecular oxygen as co-substrates, producing, in addition to formaldehyde, succinate and carbon dioxide. This hydroxylation-based mechanism does not require a protonatable lysine epsilon-amine group and consequently JmjC-containing demethylases are able to demethylate tri-, di- and monomethylated lysines.<br>The coordinates of post-translational modifications represented and described here follow UniProt standard practice whereby coordinates refer to the translated protein before any further processing. Histone literature typically refers to coordinates of the protein after the initiating methionine has been removed. Therefore the coordinates of post-translated residues in the Reactome database and described here are frequently +1 when compared with the literature.<br>In general, methylation at histone H3 lysine-5 (H3K4) and lysine-37 (H3K36), including di- and trimethylation at these sites, has been linked to actively transcribed genes (reviewed in Martin & Zhang 2005). In contrast, lysine-10 (H3K9) promoter methylation is considered a repressive mark for euchromatic genes and is also one of the landmark modifications associated with heterochromatin (Peters et al. 2002).<br>The first reported JmjC-containing demethylases were KDM2A/B (JHDM1A/B, FBXL11/10). These catalyse demethylation of histone H3 lysine-37 when mono- or di-methylated (H3K36Me1/2) (Tsukada et al. 2006). They were found to contain a JmjC catalytic domain, previously implicated in chromatin-dependent functions (Clissold & Ponting 2001). Subsequently, many other JmjC enzymes have been identified and discovered to have lysine demethylase activities with distinct methylation site and state specificities. <br>KDM3A/B (JHDM2A/B) are specific for mono or di-methylated lysine-10 on histone H3 (H3K9Me1/2) (Yamane et al. 2006, Kim et al. 2012). KDM4A-C (JMJD2A-C/JHDM3A-C) catalyse demethylation of di- or tri-methylated histone H3 at lysine-10 (H3K9Me2/3) (Cloos et al. 2006, Fodor et al. 2006), with a strong preference for Me3 (Whetstine et al. 2007). KDM4D (JMJD2D) also catalyses demethylation of H3K9Me2/3 (Whetstine et al. 2007). KDM4A-C (JHDM3A-C) can also catalyse demethylation of lysine-37 of histone H3 (H3K36Me2/3) (Klose et al. 2006). KDM5A-D (JARID1A-D) catalyses demethylation of di- or tri-methylated lysine-5 of histone H3 (H3K4Me2/3) (Christensen et al. 2007, Klose et al. 2007, Lee et al. 2007, Secombe et al. 2007, Seward et al. 2007, Iwase et al. 2007). KDM6A and KDM6B (UTX/JMJD3) catalyse demethylation of di- or tri-methylated lysine-28 of histone H3 (H3K27Me2/3) (Agger et al. 2007, Cho et al. 2007, De Santra et al. 2007, Lan et al. 2007, Lee et al. 2007).<br><br>KDM7A (KIAA1718/JHDM1D) catalyses demethylation of mono- or di-methylated lysine-10 of histone H3 (H3K9Me1/2) and mono- and di-methylated lysine-28 of histone H3 (H3K27Me1/2) (Horton et al. 2010, Huang et al. 2010). PHF8 (JHDM1E) catalyses demethylation of mono- or di-methylated lysine-10 of histone H3 (H3K9Me1/2) and mono-methylated lysine-21 of histone H4 (H4K20Me1) (Loenarz et al. 2010, Horton et al. 2010, Feng et al. 2010, Kleine-Kohlbrecher et al. 2010, Fortschegger et al. 2010, Qi et al. 2010, Liu et al. 2010). PHF2 (JHDM1E) catalyses demethylation of mono- or di-methylated lysine-10 of histone H3 (H3K9Me1/2) (Wen et al, 2010, Baba et al. 2011). JMJD6 was initially characterized as an arginine demethylase that catalyses demethylation of mono or di methylated arginine 3 of histone H3 (H3R2Me1/2) and arginine 4 of histone H4 (H4R3Me1/2) (Chang et al. 2007) although it was subsequently also characterized as a lysine hydroxylase (Webby et al. 2009). N.B. The coordinates of post-translational modifications represented and described here follow UniProt standard practice whereby coordinates refer to the translated protein before any further processing. Histone literature typically refers to coordinates of the protein after the initiating methionine has been removed. Therefore the coordinates of post-translated residues in the Reactome database and described here are frequently +1 when compared with the literature. 
R-HSA-5693567	HDR through Homologous Recombination (HR) or Single Strand Annealing (SSA)	Homology directed repair (HDR) of replication-independent DNA double strand breaks (DSBs) via homologous recombination repair (HRR) or single strand annealing (SSA) requires the activation of ATM followed by ATM-mediated phosphorylation of DNA repair proteins. ATM coordinates the recruitment of DNA repair and signaling proteins to DSBs and formation of the so-called ionizing radiation induced foci (IRIF). While IRIFs include chromatin regions kilobases away from the actual DSB, this Reactome pathway represents simplified foci and shows events that happen at the very ends of the broken DNA.<p>For both HRR and SSA to occur, the ends of the DNA DSB must be processed (resected) to generate lengthy 3' ssDNA tails, and the resulting ssDNA coated with RPA complexes, triggering ATR activation and signaling.<p>After the resection step, BRCA2 and RAD51 trigger HRR, a very accurate process in which the 3'-ssDNA overhang invades a sister chromatid, base pairs with the complementary strand of the sister chromatid DNA duplex, creating a D-loop, and uses the complementary sister chromatid strand as a template for DNA repair synthesis that bridges the DSB.<p>The SSA is triggered when 3'-ssDNA overhangs created in the resection step contain highly homologous direct repeats. In a process involving RAD52, the direct repeats in each 3'-ssDNA overhang become annealed, the unannealed 3'-flaps excised, and structures then processed by DNA repair synthesis. SSA results in the loss of one of the annealed repeats and the DNA sequence between the two repeats. Therefore, SSA is error-prone and is probably used as a backup for HRR, with RAD52 loss-of-function mutations being synthetically lethal with mutations in HRR genes, such as BRCA2 (reviewed by Ciccia and Elledge 2010).
R-HSA-5685942	HDR through Homologous Recombination (HRR)	Homology directed repair (HDR) through homologous recombination is known as homologous recombination repair (HRR). HRR occurs after extensive resection of DNA double strand break (DSB) ends, which creates long 3'-ssDNA overhangs. RAD51 coats 3'-ssDNA overhangs in a BRCA2-controlled fashion, creating invasive RAD51 nucleofilaments. The RAD51 nucleofilament invades a sister chromatid DNA duplex, leading to D-loop formation. After the D-loop is extended by DNA repair synthesis, the resulting recombination intermediates in the form of extended D-loops or double Holliday junctions can be resolved through crossover- or non-crossover-generating processes (reviewed by Ciccia and Elledge 2010).
R-HSA-5685939	HDR through MMEJ (alt-NHEJ)	Homology directed repair (HDR) through microhomology-mediated end joining (MMEJ) is an error prone process also known as alternative nonhomologous end joining (alt-NHEJ), although it does not involve proteins that participate in the classical NHEJ. Contrary to the classical NHEJ and other HDR pathways, homologous recombination repair (HRR) and single strand annealing (SSA), MMEJ does not require ATM activation. In fact, ATM activation inhibits MMEJ. Therefore, MMEJ may be triggered when the amount of DNA double strand breaks (DSBs) overwhelms DNA repair machinery of higher fidelity or when cells are deficient in components of high fidelity DNA repair.<p>MMEJ is initiated by a limited resection of DNA DSB ends by the MRN complex (MRE11A:RAD50:NBN) and RBBP8 (CtIP), in the absence of CDK2-mediated RBBP8 phosphorylation and related BRCA1:BARD1 recruitment (Yun and Hiom 2009). Single strand DNA (ssDNA) at resected DNA DSB ends recruits PARP1 or PARP2 homo- or heterodimers, together with DNA polymerase theta (POLQ) and FEN1 5'-flap endonuclease. In a poorly studied sequence of events, POLQ promotes the annealing of two 3'-ssDNA overhangs through microhomologous regions that are optimally 10-19 nucleotides long. Using analogy with POLB-mediated long patch base excision repair (BER), it is plausible that PARP1 (or PARP2) dimers coordinate the extension of annealed 3'-ssDNA overhangs via POLQ-mediated strand displacement synthesis with FEN1-mediated cleavage of the resulting 5'-flaps (Liang et al. 2005, Mansour et al. 2011, Sharma et al. 2015, Kent et al. 2015, Ciccaldi et al. 2015, Mateos-Gomez et al. 2015). The MRN complex subsequently recruits DNA ligase 3 (LIG3) bound to XRCC1 (LIG3:XRCC1) to ligate the remaining single strand nicks (SSBs) at MMEJ sites (Della-Maria et al. 2011).<p>Similar to single strand annealing (SSA), MMEJ leads to deletion of one of the microhomology regions used for annealing and the DNA sequence in between two annealed microhomology regions. MMEJ, just like classical NHEJ, can result in genomic translocations (Ghezraoui et al. 2014). In addition, since POLQ is an error-prone DNA polymerase, MMEJ introduces frequent base substitutions (Ceccaldi et al. 2015).
R-HSA-5685938	HDR through Single Strand Annealing (SSA)	Homology directed repair (HDR) through single strand annealing (SSA), similar to HDR through homologous recombination repair (HRR), involves extensive resection of DNA double strand break ends (DSBs), preceded by ATM activation and formation of the so-called ionizing radiation induced foci (IRIF) at DNA DSB sites. Following ATM activation and foci formation, the two-step resection is initiated by the MRN complex (MRE11A:RAD50:NBN) and RBBP8 (CtIP) associated with BRCA1:BARD1, and completed by EXO1 or DNA2 in cooperation with DNA helicases BLM, WRN and BRIP1 (BACH1) (Sartori et al. 2007, Yun and Hiom 2009, Eid et al. 2010, Nimonkar et al. 2011, Suhasini et al. 2011, Sturzenegger et al. 2014). Long 3'-ssDNA overhangs produced by extensive resection are coated by the RPA heterotrimer (RPA1:RPA2:RPA3), triggering ATR signaling. ATR signaling is needed for SSA, probably because of the related phosphorylation of RPA2 (Zou and Elledge 2003, Anantha et al. 2007, Liu et al. 2012).<p>RAD52 is the key mediator of SSA. Activated ATM phosphorylates and activates ABL1, and activated ABL1 subsequently phosphorylates pre-formed RAD52 heptameric rings, increasing their affinity for ssDNA (Honda et al. 2011). Phosphorylated RAD52 binds phosphorylated RPA heterotrimers on 3'-ssDNA overhangs at resected DNA DSBs. RAD52 also binds RAD51 and prevents formation of invasive RAD51 nucleofilaments involved in HRR (Chen et al. 1999, Van Dyck et al. 1999, Parsons et al. 2000, Jackson et al. 2002, Singleton et al. 2002).<p>RAD52 promotes annealing of two 3'-ssDNA overhangs when highly homologous directed repeats are present in both 3'-ssDNA overhangs. Nonhomologous regions lying 3' to the annealed repeats are displaced as 3'-flaps (Parsons et al. 2000, Van Dyck et al. 2001, Singleton et al. 2002, Stark et al. 2004, Mansour et al. 2008). The endonuclease complex composed of ERCC1 and ERCC4 (XPF) is subsequently recruited to SSA sites through direct interaction between RAD52 and ERCC4, leading to cleavage of 3' flaps (Motycka et al. 2004, Al-Minawi et al. 2008). The identity of a DNA ligase that closes the remaining single strand nicks (SSBs) to complete SSA-mediated repair is not known.<p>SSA results in deletion of one of the annealed repeats and the intervening DNA sequence between the two annealed repeats and is thus mutagenic.
R-HSA-5610787	Hedgehog 'off' state	Hedgehog is a secreted morphogen that has evolutionarily conserved roles in body organization by regulating the activity of the Ci/Gli transcription factor family. In Drosophila in the absence of Hh signaling, full-length Ci is partially degraded by the proteasome to generate a truncated repressor form that translocates to the nucleus to represses Hh-responsive genes. Binding of Hh ligand to the Patched (PTC) receptor allows the 7-pass transmembrane protein Smoothened (SMO) to be activated in an unknown manner, disrupting the partial proteolysis of Ci and allowing the full length activator form to accumulate (reviewed in Ingham et al, 2011; Briscoe and Therond, 2013). <br>While many of the core components of Hh signaling are conserved from flies to humans, the pathways do show points of significant divergence. Notably, the human genome encodes three Ci homologues, GLI1, 2 and 3 that each play slightly different roles in regulating Hh responsive genes. GLI3 is the primary repressor of Hh signaling in vertebrates, and is converted to the truncated GLI3R repressor form in the absence of Hh. GLI2 is a potent activator of transcription in the presence of Hh but contributes only minimally to the repression function. While a minor fraction of GLI2 protein is processed into the repressor form in the absence of Hh, the majority is either fully degraded by the proteasome or sequestered in the full-length form in the cytosol by protein-protein interactions. GLI1 lacks the repression domain and appears to be an obligate transcriptional activator (reviewed in Briscoe and Therond, 2013).<br> Vertebrate but not fly Hh signaling also depends on the movement of pathway components through the primary cilium. The primary cilium is a non-motile microtubule based structure whose construction and maintenance depends on intraflagellar transport (IFT). Anterograde IFT moves molecules from the ciliary base along the axoneme to the ciliary tip in a manner that requires the microtubule-plus-end directed kinesin KIF3 motor complex and the IFT-B protein complex, while retrograde IFT back to the ciliary base depends on the minus-end directed dynein motor and the IFT-A complex. Genetic screens have identified a number of cilia-related proteins that are required both to maintain Hh in the 'off' state and to transduce the signal when the pathway is activated (reviewed in Hui and Angers, 2011; Goetz and Anderson, 2010). 
R-HSA-5632684	Hedgehog 'on' state	Hedgehog is a secreted morphogen that has evolutionarily conserved roles in body organization by regulating the activity of the Ci/Gli transcription factor family. In Drosophila in the absence of Hh signaling, full-length Ci is partially degraded by the proteasome to generate a truncated repressor form that translocates to the nucleus to represses Hh-responsive genes. Binding of Hh ligand to the Patched (PTC) receptor allows the 7-pass transmembrane protein Smoothened (SMO) to be activated in an unknown manner, disrupting the partial proteolysis of Ci and allowing the full length activator form to accumulate (reviewed in Ingham et al, 2011; Briscoe and Therond, 2013). <br>While many of the core components of Hh signaling are conserved from flies to humans, the pathways do show points of significant divergence. Notably, the human genome encodes three Ci homologues, GLI1, 2 and 3 that each play slightly different roles in regulating Hh responsive genes. GLI3 is the primary repressor of Hh signaling in vertebrates, and is converted to the truncated GLI3R repressor form in the absence of Hh. GLI2 is a potent activator of transcription in the presence of Hh but contributes only minimally to the repression function. While a minor fraction of GLI2 protein is processed into the repressor form in the absence of Hh, the majority is either fully degraded by the proteasome or sequestered in the full-length form in the cytosol by protein-protein interactions. GLI1 lacks the repression domain and appears to be an obligate transcriptional activator (reviewed in Briscoe and Therond, 2013).<br> Vertebrate but not fly Hh signaling also depends on the movement of pathway components through the primary cilium. The primary cilium is a non-motile microtubule based structure whose construction and maintenance depends on intraflagellar transport (IFT). Anterograde IFT moves molecules from the ciliary base along the axoneme to the ciliary tip in a manner that requires the microtubule-plus-end directed kinesin KIF3 motor complex and the IFT-B protein complex, while retrograde IFT back to the ciliary base depends on the minus-end directed dynein motor and the IFT-A complex. Genetic screens have identified a number of cilia-related proteins that are required both to maintain Hh in the 'off' state and to transduce the signal when the pathway is activated (reviewed in Hui and Angers, 2011; Goetz and Anderson, 2010). 
R-HSA-5358346	Hedgehog ligand biogenesis	Mammalian genomes encode three Hedgehog ligands, Sonic Hedgehog (SHH), Indian Hedgehog (IHH) and Desert Hedgehog (DHH). These secreted morphogens can remain associated with lipid rafts on the surface of the secreting cell and affect developmental processes in adjacent cells. Alternatively, they can be released by proteolysis or packaging into vesicles or lipoprotein particles and dispersed to act on distant cells. SHH activity is required for organization of the limb bud, notochord and neural plate, IHH regulates bone and cartilage development and is partially redundant with SHH, and DHH contributes to germ cell development in the testis and formation of the peripheral nerve sheath (reviewed in Pan et al, 2013). <br><br>Despite divergent biological roles, all Hh ligands are subject to proteolytic processing and lipid modification during transit to the surface of the secreting cell (reviewed in Gallet, 2011). Precursor Hh undergoes autoproteolytic cleavage mediated by the C-terminal region to yield an amino-terminal peptide Hh-Np (also referred to as Hh-N) (Chen et al, 2011). No other well defined role for the C-terminal region of Hh has been identified, and the secreted Hh-Np is responsible for all Hh signaling activity. Hh-Np is modified with cholesterol and palmitic acid during transit through the secretory system, and both modifications contribute to the activity of the ligand (Porter et al, 1996; Pepinsky et al, 1998; Chamoun et al, 2001). <br><br>At the cell surface, Hh-Np remains associated with the secreting cell membrane by virtue of its lipid modifications, which promote clustering of Hh-Np into lipid rafts (Callejo et al, 2006; Peters et al, 2004). Long range dispersal of Hh-Np depends on the untethering of the ligand from the membrane through a variety of mechanisms. These include release of monomers through the combined activity of the transmembrane protein Dispatched (DISP2) and the secreted protein SCUBE2, assembly into soluble multimers or apolipoprotein particles or release on the surface of exovesicles (Vyas et al, 2008; Tukachinsky et al, 2012; Chen 2004; Zeng et al, 2001; reviewed in Briscoe and Therond, 2013).
R-HSA-189451	Heme biosynthesis	Eight enzymes are involved in heme biosynthesis, four each in the mitochondria and the cytosol. The process starts in the mitochondria with the condensation of succinyl CoA (from the TCA cycle) and glycine to form 5-aminolevulinate (ALA). The next four steps take place in the cytosol. Two molecules of ALA are condensed to form the monopyrrole porphobilinogen (PBG). The next two steps convert four molecules of PBG into the cyclic tetrapyrrole uroporphyringen III, which is then decarboxylated into coproporphyrinogen III. The last three steps occur in the mitochondria and involve modifications to the tetrapyrrole side chains and finally, insertion of iron. In addition to these synthetic steps, a spontaneous cytosolic reaction allows the formation of uroporphyringen I which is then enzymatically decarboxylated to coproporphyrinogen I, which cannot be metabolized further in humans. Also, lead can inactivate ALAD, the enzyme that catalyzes PBG synthesis, and ferrochelatase, the enzyme that catalyzes heme synthesis.<br>The porphyrias are disorders that arise from defects in the enzymes of heme biosynthesis. Defective pathway enzymes after ALA synthase result in accumulated substrates which can cause either skin problems, neurological complications, or both due to their toxicity in higher concentrations. They are broadly classified as hepatic porphyrias or erythropoietic porphyrias, based on the site of the overproduction of the substrate. Each defect is described together with the reaction it affects.
R-HSA-189483	Heme degradation	Most of the heme degraded in humans comes from hemoglobin. Approximately 6-8 grams of hemoglobin is degraded daily which is equivalent to approximately 300 milligrams of heme per day. Heme is not recycled so it must be degraded and excreted. The iron, however, is conserved. There are two steps to heme degradation;<br>1. cleavage of the heme ring by a microsomal heme oxygenase producing biliverdin<br>2. biliverdin is reduced to bilirubin.<br>Bilirubin can then be conjugated with glucuronic acid and excreted. 
R-HSA-109582	Hemostasis	Hemostasis is a physiological response that culminates in the arrest of bleeding from an injured vessel. Under normal conditions the vascular endothelium supports vasodilation, inhibits platelet adhesion and activation, suppresses coagulation, enhances fibrin cleavage and is anti-inflammatory in character. Under acute vascular trauma, vasoconstrictor mechanisms predominate and the endothelium becomes prothrombotic, procoagulatory and proinflammatory in nature. This is achieved by a reduction of endothelial dilating agents: adenosine, NO and prostacyclin; and by the direct action of ADP, serotonin and thromboxane on vascular smooth muscle cells to elicit their contraction (Becker et al. 2000). The chief trigger for the change in endothelial function that leads to the formation of a haemostatic thrombus is the loss of the endothelial cell barrier between blood and extracellular matrix components (Ruggeri 2002). Circulating platelets identify and discriminate areas of endothelial lesions; here, they adhere to the exposed sub endothelium. Their interaction with the various thrombogenic substrates and locally generated or released agonists results in platelet activation. This process is described as possessing two stages, firstly, adhesion - the initial tethering to a surface, and secondly aggregation - the platelet-platelet cohesion (Savage & Cattaneo et al. 2001). Three mechansism contribute to the loss of blood following vessel injury. The vessel constricts, reducing the loss of blood. Platelets adhere to the site of injury, become activated and aggregate with fibrinogen into a soft plug that limits blood loss, a process termed primary hemostasis. Proteins and small molecules are released from granules by activated platelets, stimulating the plug formation process. Fibrinogen from plasma forms bridges between activated platelets. These events initiate the clotting cascade (secondary hemostasis). Negatively-charged phospholipids exposed at the site of injury and on activated platelets interact with tissue factor, leading to a cascade of reactions that culminates with the formation of an insoluble fibrin clot.
R-HSA-1638091	Heparan sulfate/heparin (HS-GAG) metabolism	The acronym HS-GAG is used to describe both heparin and heparan sulfate. HS-GAG is a member of the glycosaminoglycan family and consists of a variably sulfated repeating disaccharide unit, the most common one (50% of the total) being glucuronic acid (GlcA) linked to N-acetylglucosamine (GlcNAc). GlcA can be epimerized to iduronic acid. Higher degrees of sulfation and iduronic acid content in the polysaccharide chain confers the name heparin rather than heparan sulfate to the chain. HS-GAG, like the majority of GAGs in the body, are linked to core proteins, forming proteoglycans (mucopolysaccharides). Two or three HS-GAG chains attach to a core protein on the cell surface or in the extracellular matrix (Sasisekharan & Venkataraman 2000). HS-GAG bound to a core protein can regulate many biological processes such as angiogenesis, blood coagulation and tumour metastasis (Stringer & Gallagher 1997, Tumova et al. 2000). Degradation of HS-GAG is required to maintain a natural turnover of GAGs. Defects in the degradative enzymes result in lysosomal storage diseases, where GAGs build up rather than being broken down and having pathological effects (Ballabio & Gieselmann 2009).
R-HSA-5657560	Hereditary fructose intolerance	Deficiencies in aldolase B arising from mutations in the aldolase B gene (ALDOB) prevent the cleavage of fructose 1-phosphate to glyceraldehyde (GA) and dihydroxyacetone phosphate (DHAP), leading to hereditary fructose intolerance (HFI). This autosomal recessive disorder is potentially fatal, but can be managed by exclusion of fructose from the diet (Cox et al. 1988; Tolan 1995).
R-HSA-189200	Hexose transport	Hexoses, notably fructose, glucose, and galactose, generated in the lumen of the small intestine by breakdown of dietary carbohydrate are taken up by enterocytes lining the microvilli of the small intestine and released from them into the blood. Uptake into enterocytes is mediated by two transporters localized on the lumenal surfaces of the cells, SGLT1 (glucose and galactose, together with sodium ions) and GLUT5 (fructose). GLUT2, localized on the basolateral surfaces of enterocytes, mediates the release of these hexoses into the blood (Wright et al. 2004). GLUT2 may also play a role in hexose uptake from the gut lumen into enterocytes when the lumenal content of monosaccharides is very high (e.g., Kellet and Brot-Laroche, 2005) and GLUT5 mediates fructose uptake from the blood into cells of the body, notably hepatocytes.<p>Cells take up glucose by facilitated diffusion, via glucose transporters (GLUTs) associated with the plasma membrane, a reversible reaction. Four tissue-specific GLUT isoforms are known. Glucose in the cytosol is phosphorylated by tissue-specific kinases to yield glucose 6-phosphate, which cannot cross the plasma membrane because of its negative charge. In the liver, this reaction is catalyzed by glucokinase which has a low affinity for glucose (Km about 10 mM) but is not inhibited by glucose 6-phosphate. In other tissues, this reaction is catalyzed by isoforms of hexokinase. Hexokinases are feedback-inhibited by glucose 6-phosphate and have a high affinity for glucose (Km about 0.1 mM). Liver cells can thus accumulate large amounts of glucose 6-phosphate but only when blood glucose concentrations are high, while most other tissues can take up glucose even when blood glucose concentrations are low but cannot accumulate much intracellular glucose 6-phosphate. These differences are consistent with the view that that the liver functions to buffer blood glucose concentrations, while most other tissues take up glucose to meet immediate metabolic needs.<p>Glucose 6-phosphatase, expressed in liver and kidney, allows glucose 6-phosphate generated by gluconeogenesis (both tissues) and glycogen breakdown (liver) to leave the cell. The absence of glucose 6-phosphatase from other tissues makes glucose uptake by these tissues essentially irreversible, consistent with the view that cells in these tissues take up glucose for local metabolic use.
R-HSA-5387390	Hh mutants abrogate ligand secretion	Hh signaling is required for a number of developmental processes, and mutations that disrupt the normal processing and biogenesis of Hh ligand can result in neonatal abnormalities. SHH is one of a number of genes that have been associated with the congenital disorder holoprosencephaly, which causes abnormalities in brain and craniofacial development (Roessler et al, 2009; reviewed in Roessler and Muenke, 2011). SHH variants associated with the condition affect the autocatalytic processing of the precursor and dramatically impair the production of the secreted active Hh-Np, abrogating signaling (reviewed in Pan et al, 2013). Aberrant Hh signaling is also associated with gondal dysgenesis syndromes in which palmitoylation of DHH is abrogated by mutation of the acyltransferase HHAT (Callier et al, 2014).
R-HSA-5362768	Hh mutants that don't undergo autocatalytic processing are degraded by ERAD	Hh signaling is required for a number of developmental processes, and mutations that disrupt the normal processing and biogenesis of Hh ligand can result in neonatal abnormalities. SHH is one of a number of genes that have been associated with the congenital disorder holoprosencephaly, which causes abnormalities in brain and craniofacial development (Roessler et al, 2009; reviewed in Roessler and Muenke, 2011). SHH variants associated with the condition affect the autocatalytic processing of the precursor and dramatically impair the production of the secreted active Hh-Np, abrogating signaling (reviewed in Pan et al, 2013).
R-HSA-629597	Highly calcium permeable nicotinic acetylcholine receptors	Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors exhibit high influx of Ca2+, the degree of Ca2+ permeability is dependent on the subunit composition; homomeric acetylcholine receptors containing aplha 7 subunits allow maximum Ca2+ influx followed by receptors containing alpha3 beta2 alpha5 or alpha3 beta4 alpha5.
R-HSA-629594	Highly calcium permeable postsynaptic nicotinic acetylcholine receptors	Postsynaptic acetylcholine receptors mediate Ca2+ currents that may be involved in the facilitation of long term potentiation (LTP).
R-HSA-629587	Highly sodium permeable acetylcholine nicotinic receptors	Nicotinic acetylcholne receptors that have low Ca2+ permeability allow the influx of Na+ which causes depolarization of the membrane initiating voltage dependent responses such as activation of voltage dependent opening of Ca2+ channels and thus eliciting an increase in Ca2+ and downstream signaling. These receptors could be found in both presynaptic and postsynaptic terminals.
R-HSA-390650	Histamine receptors	Histamine is a biogenic amine involved in local immune responses, regulation of gut function and neurotransmission. It exerts its actions by binding to histamine receptors. There are four receptors in humans, H1-H4 (Hill SJ et al, 1997).
R-HSA-70921	Histidine catabolism	The major pathway of histidine catabolism, annotated here, proceeds in four steps to yield glutamate and, in the process, convert one molecule of tetrahydrofolate to 5-formiminotetrahydrofolate (Morris et al. 1972). Histidine can also be decarboxylated to form histamine. Histidine can also be used to form carnosine (beta-alanyl-L-histidine), an abundant dipeptide in skeletal muscle and brain of most vertebrates.
R-HSA-6788656	Histidine, lysine, phenylalanine, tyrosine, proline and tryptophan catabolism	The catabolic pathways of histidine, lysine, phenylalanine, tyrosine, proline and tryptophan are described in this section (Berg et al. 2002).
R-HSA-167287	HIV elongation arrest and recovery	RNA Pol II arrest is believed to be a result of irreversible backsliding of the enzyme by ~7-14 nucleotides. TFIIS reactivates arrested RNA Pol II by promoting the excision of nascent transcript ~7-14 nucleotides upstream of the 3' end. 
R-HSA-162906	HIV Infection	The global pandemic of Human Immunodeficiency Virus (HIV) infection has resulted in tens of millions of people infected by the virus and millions more affected. UNAIDS estimates around 40 million HIV/AIDS patients worldwide with 75% of them living in sub-Saharan Africa. The primary method of HIV infection is by sexual exposure while nonsexual HIV transmission also can occur through transfusion with contaminated blood products, injection drug use, occupational exposure,accidental needlesticks or mother-to-child transmission. HIV damages the immune system, leaving the infected person vulnerable to a variety of "opportunistic" infections arising from host immune impairment (Hare, 2004).<br>HIV-1 and the less common HIV-2 belong to the family of retroviruses. HIV-1 contains a single-stranded RNA genome that is 9 kilobases in length and contains 9 genes that encode 15 different proteins. These proteins are classified as: structural proteins (Gag, Pol, and Env), regulatory proteins (Tat and Rev), and accessory proteins (Vpu, Vpr, Vif, and Nef) (Frankel and Young,1998).<br><b>HIV infection </b>cycle can be divided into two phases:<br>1. An <b>Early phase</b> consisting of early events occuring after HIV infection of a susceptible target cell and a <br>2. <b>Late phase</b> comprising the later events in the HIV-infected cell resulting in the assembly of new infectious virions. The section titled <b>HIV lifecycle</b> consists of annotations of events in these two phases.<br>The virus has developed various molecular strategies to suppress the antiviral immune responses (innate, cellular and humoral) of the host. HIV-1 viral auxiliary proteins (Tat, Rev, Nef, Vif, Vpr and Vpu) play important roles in these host-pathogen interactions (Li et al.,2005). The section titled <b>Host interactions of HIV factors</b> will highlight these complex post-infection processes and the annotations will be released in near future.<br>
R-HSA-162587	HIV Life Cycle	The life cycle of HIV-1 is divided into early and late phases, shown schematically in the figure. In the <b>early</b> phase, an HIV-1 virion binds to receptors and co-receptors on the human host cell surface (a), viral and host cell membranes fuse and the viral particle is uncoated (b), the viral genome is reverse transcribed and the viral preintegration complex (PIC) forms (c), the PIC is transported through the nuclear pore into the nucleoplasm (d), and the viral reverse transcript is integrated into a host cell chromosome (e). In the <b>late</b> phase, viral RNAs are transcribed from the integrated viral genome and processed to generate viral mRNAs and full-length viral genomic RNAs (f), the viral RNAs are exported through the nuclear pore into the cytosol (g), viral mRNAs are translated and the resulting viral proteins are post-translationally processed (h), core particles containing viral genomic RNA and proteins assemble at the host cell membrane and immature viral particles are released by budding. The released particles mature to become infectious (j), completing the cycle (Frankel and Young 1998; Miller and Bushman 1997).<br>Most of the crucial concepts used to describe these processes were originally elucidated in studies of retroviruses associated with tumors in chickens, birds, and other animal model systems, and the rapid elucidation of the basic features of the HIV-1 life cycle was critically dependent on the intellectual framework provided by these earlier studies. This earlier work has been very well summarized (e.g., Weiss et al. 1984; Coffin et al. 1997); here for brevity and clarity we focus on experimental studies specific to the HIV-1 life cycle.
R-HSA-167169	HIV Transcription Elongation	In the absence of the HIV-1 protein Tat, transcription of the proviral DNA is inefficient and results in the production of truncated transcripts (Kao et al., 1987). While initiation of transcription from the HIV-1 LTR and formation of the early elongation complex occurs normally, transcription elongation is incomplete with non-processive polymerases disengaging from the proviral DNA template prematurely (reviewed in Karn 1999). The mechanism of Tat-mediated elongation is described below.
R-HSA-167161	HIV Transcription Initiation	Formation of the open complex exposes the template strand to the catalytic center of the RNA polymerase II enzyme. This facilitates formation of the first phosphodiester bond, which marks transcription initiation. As a result of this, the TFIIB basal transcription factor dissociates from the initiation complex.<p>The open transcription initiation complex is unstable and can revert to the closed state. Initiation at this stage requires continued (d)ATP-hydrolysis by TFIIH. Dinucleotide transcripts are not stably associated with the transcription complex. Upon dissociation they form abortive products. The transcription complex is also sensitive to inhibition by small oligo-nucleotides. <p>Dinucleotides complementary to position -1 and +1 in the template can also direct first phosphodiester bond formation. This reaction is independent on the basal transcription factors TFIIE and TFIIH and does not involve open complex formation. This reaction is sensitive to inhibition by single-stranded oligonucleotides.
R-HSA-167168	HIV Transcription Termination	Termination of HIV-1 transcription is believed to be mechanistically the same as termination of endogenous human messages.
R-HSA-5693579	Homologous DNA Pairing and Strand Exchange	The presynaptic phase of homologous DNA pairing and strand exchange begins with the displacement of RPA from 3'-ssDNA overhangs created by extensive resection of DNA double strand break (DSB) ends. RPA is displaced by the joint action of RAD51 and BRCA2. BRCA2 nucleates RAD51 on 3'-ssDNA overhangs, leading to formation of invasive RAD51 nucleofilaments which are stabilized by the BCDX2 complex (RAD51B:RAD51C:RAD51D:XRCC2). Stable synaptic pairing between recombining DNA molecules involves the invasion of the homologous sister chromatid duplex DNA by the RAD51 nucleofilament and base-pairing between the invading ssDNA and the complementary sister chromatid DNA strand, while the non-complementary strand of the sister chromatid DNA duplex is displaced. This results in the formation of a D-loop structure (Sung et al., 2003). PALB2 and RAD51AP1 synergistically stimulate RAD51 recombinase activity and D-loop formation. PALB2 simultaneously interacts with RAD51, BRCA2 and RAD51AP1 (Modesti et al. 2007, Wiese et al. 2007, Buisson et al. 2010, Dray et al. 2010). PALB2 also interacts with BRCA1, and this interaction fine-tunes the localization of BRCA2 and RAD51 at DNA DSBs (Zhang et al. 2009, Sy et al. 2009). The CX3 complex, composed of RAD51C and XRCC3, binds D-loop structures through interaction with PALB2 and may be involved in the resolution of Holliday junctions (Chun et al. 2013, Park et al. 2014).<p>While RAD52 promotes formation of invasive RAD51 nucleofilaments in yeast, human BRCA2 performs this function, while human RAD52 regulates single strand annealing (SSA) (reviewed by Ciccia and Elledge 2010).
R-HSA-5693538	Homology Directed Repair	Homology directed repair (HDR) of DNA double strand breaks (DSBs) requires resection of DNA DSB ends. Resection creates 3'-ssDNA overhangs which then anneal with a homologous DNA sequence. This homologous sequence can then be used as a template for DNA repair synthesis that bridges the DSB. HDR preferably occurs through the error-free homologous recombination repair (HRR), but can also occur through the error-prone single strand annealing (SSA), or the least accurate microhomology-mediated end joining (MMEJ).<p>HRR and SSA share the initial steps that involve ATM signaling, formation of the so-called ionizing radiation-induced foci (IRIF), extensive resection of DNA DSB ends and activation of ATR signaling. In homologous recombination, 3'-ssDNA overhangs anneal with complementary sister chromatid strands. In SSA, 3'-ssDNA overhangs anneal with each other through homologous direct repeats contained in each overhang, resulting in deletions of one of the repeats and the DNA sequence in between the repeats during DNA repair synthesis.<p>Contrary to HRR and SSA, which both involve annealing of long stretches of highly homologous DNA sequences, MMEJ entails annealing of short regions of two 3'-ssDNA overhangs (up to 20 nucleotides) and is therefore more promiscuous and more likely to join unrelated DNA molecules. The error rate of MMEJ is additionally increased by the low fidelity of the DNA polymerase theta (POLQ), which performs DNA repair synthesis in MMEJ.<p>For reviews of this topic, please refer to Khanna 2001, Thompson and Schild 2001, Thompson and Schild 2002, Thompson and Limoli 2003, Ciccia and Elledge 2010.
R-HSA-375281	Hormone ligand-binding receptors	The class A (rhodopsin-like) GPCRs that bind to hormone ligands are annotated here. The hormones follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH), luteinizing hormone (LH), thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) and human chorionic gonadotrophin (hCG) are dimeric glycoproteins, sharing an identical alpha subunit and varying beta subunits. Their actions are mediated by the respective GPCRs, influencing reproductive processes and thyroid hormone release.
R-HSA-163560	Hormone-sensitive lipase (HSL)-mediated triacylglycerol hydrolysis	Triacylglycerol is a major energy store in the body and its hydrolysis to yield fatty acids and glycerol is a tightly regulated part of energy metabolism. A central part in this regulation is played by hormone-sensitive lipase (HSL), a neutral lipase abundant in adipocytes and skeletal and cardiac muscle, but also abundant in ovarian and adrenal tissue, where it mediates cholesterol ester hydrolysis, yielding cholesterol for steroid biosynthesis. The hormones to which it is sensitive include catecholamines (e.g., epinephrine), ACTH, and glucagon, all of which trigger signaling cascades that lead to its phosphorylation and activation, and insulin, which sets off events leading to its dephosphorylation and inactivation (Holm et al. 2000; Kraemer and Shen 2002).<p>The processes of triacylglycerol and cholesterol ester hydrolysis are also regulated by subcellular compartmentalization: these lipids are packaged in cytosolic particles and the enzymes responsible for their hydrolysis, and perhaps for additional steps in their metabolism, are organized at the surfaces of these particles (e.g., Brasaemle et al. 2004). This organization is dynamic: the inactive form of HSL is not associated with the particles, but is translocated there after being phosphorylated. Conversely, perilipin, a major constituent of the particle surface, appears to block access of enzymes to the lipids within the particle; its phosphorylation allows greater access. <p>Here, HSL-mediated triacylglycerol hydrolysis is described as a pathway containing twelve reactions. The first six of these involve activation: phosphorylation of HSL, dimerization of HSL, disruption of CGI-58:perilipin complexes at the surfaces of cytosolic lipid particles, phosphorylation of perilipin, association of phosphorylated HSL with FABP, and translocation of HSL from the cytosol to the surfaces of lipid particles. The next four reactions are the hydrolysis reactions themselves: the hydrolysis of cholesterol esters, and the successive removal of three fatty acids from triacylglycerol. The last two reactions, dephosphorylation of perilipin and HSL, negatively regulate the pathway. These events are outlined in the figure below. Inputs (substrates) and outputs (products) of individual reactions are connected by black arrows; blue lines connect output activated enzymes to the other reactions that they catalyze. <p>Despite the undoubted importance of these reactions in normal human energy metabolism and in the pathology of diseases such as type II diabetes, they have been studied only to a limited extent in human cells and tissues. Most experimental data are derived instead from two rodent model systems: primary adipocytes from rats, and mouse 3T3-L1 cells induced to differentiate into adipocytes.
R-HSA-162909	Host Interactions of HIV factors	Like all viruses, HIV-1 must co-opt the host cell macromolecular transport and processing machinery. HIV-1 Vpr and Rev proteins play key roles in this co-optation. Efficient HIV-1 replication likewise requires evasion of APOBEC3G-mediated mutagenesis of reverse transcripts, a process mediated by the viral Vif protein.
R-HSA-168253	Host Interactions with Influenza Factors	Infection of a human host cell with influenza virus triggers an array of host processes that interfere with viral replication, notably the production of type I interferon. The viral NS1 protein plays a central role in these virus-host interactions.
R-HSA-2022928	HS-GAG biosynthesis	Heparan sulfate (HS) and heparin (sometimes collectively called HS-GAG) consist of the disaccharide unit GlcNAc-GlcA (N-acetylglucosamine-glucuronic acid) connected by a beta1,4 linkage. Heparin is exclusively made in mast cells whereas HS is made by virtually every type of cell in the body. As the chain length increases, the polysaccharides can undergo modifcations such as epimerisation of glucuronic acid to iduronic acid and deacetylation and sulfation of GlcNAc to form sulfated glucosamine (Stringer & Gallagher 1997, Sasisekharan & Venkataraman 2000).
R-HSA-2024096	HS-GAG degradation	Lysosomal degradation of glycoproteins is part of the cellular homeostasis of glycosylation (Winchester 2005). The steps outlined below describe the degradation of heparan sulfate/heparin. Complete degradation of glycoproteins is required to avoid build up of glycosaminoglycan fragments which can cause lysosomal storage diseases. The proteolysis of the core protein of the glycoprotein is not shown here.
R-HSA-3371511	HSF1 activation	Heat shock factor 1 (HSF1) is a transcription factor that activates gene expression in response to a variety of stresses, including heat shock, oxidative stress, as well as inflammation and infection (Shamovsky I and Nudler E 2008; Akerfelt et al. 2010; Bjork and Sistonen 2010; Anckar and Sistonen 2011).<p>HSF1 is constitutively present in the cell. In the absence of stress HSF1 is found in both the cytoplasm and the nucleus as an inactive monomer (Sarge KD et al. 1993; Mercier PA et al. 1999; Vujanac M et al. 2005). A physical or chemical proteotoxic stress rapidly induces HSF1 activation, which occurs through a multi?step process, involving HSF1 monomer-to-homotrimer transition, nuclear accumulation, and binding to a promoter element, called the heat shock element (HSE), which leads to the increase in the stress-inducible gene expression (Sarge KD et al. 1993; Baler R et al. 1998; Sonna LA et al. 2002; Shamovsky I and Nudler E 2008; Sakurai H and Enoki Y 2010; Herbomel G et al. 2013). Depending on the type of stress stimulus, the multiple events associated with HSF1 activation might be affected differently (Holmberg CI et al 2000; Bjork and Sistonen 2010).
R-HSA-3371571	HSF1-dependent transactivation	Acquisition of DNA binding activity by HSF1 is necessary but insufficient for transcriptional activation (Cotto JJ et al. 1996; Trinklein ND et al. 2004). In addition to having a sequence-specific DNA binding domain, HSF1 contains a C-terminal region which is involved in activating the transcription of the target genes (Green M et al. 1995). However, the transactivating ability of the transactivation domain itself is not stress sensitive. Rather, it's controled by a regulatory domain of HSF1 (amino acids 221-310), which represses the transactivating ability under normal physiological conditions (Green M et al. 1995; Zuo J et al. 1995; Newton EM et al. 1996). The HSF1 transactivation domain can be divided into two distinct regions, activation domain 1 (AD1) and activation domain 2 (AD2) (Brown SA et al. 1998). AD1 and AD2 each contain residues that are important for both transcriptional initiation and elongation. Mutations in acidic residues in both AD1 and AD2 preferentially affect the ability of HSF1 to stimulate transcriptional initiation, while mutations in phenylalanine residues preferentially affect stimulation of elongation (Brown SA et al. 1998). <p>Activation of the DNA-bound but transcriptionally incompetent HSF1 is thought to occur upon stress induced HSF1 phosphorylation at several serine residues (Ding XZ et al. 1997; Holmberg CI et al. 2001; Guettouche T et al. 2005). In cells exposed to heat, acquisition of HSE DNA-binding activity was observed to precede phosphorylation of HSF1 (Cotto JJ et al. 1996; Kline MP & Morimoto RI 1997). While there is a sufficient evidence to suggest that phosphorylation of HSF1 is essential to modulate HSF1 transactiviting capacity, mechanisms behind stress stimuli and kinases/phosphatases involved have not been clearly established.
R-HSA-450520	HuR (ELAVL1) binds and stabilizes mRNA	HuR (ELAVL1) is a ubiquitous protein that binds AU-rich elements in mRNAs and acts to stabilize the mRNAs. HuR activity is controlled by phosphorylation, with PKC alpha and PCK delta enhancing the ability of HuR to bind and stabilize mRNAs. Binding of mRNAs occurs in the nucleus and HuR then interacts with the CRM1 export pathway to transfer the mRNA to the cytoplasm. The mechanism by which HuR shields the mRNA from degradation is unknown.<br>HuR also regulates translation of some mRNAs, in some cases repressing translation and in some cases enhancing translation of bound mRNAs by recruiting them to polysomes.<br>HuR binds and regulates mRNAs encoding Cyclooxygenase-2 (COX2, PTGS2), Cyclin A (CCNA, CCNA2), Cyclin D1 (CCND1), Cyclin B1 (CCNB1), CD83 antigen (CD83), and proto-oncogene c-Fos (FOS).<br>HuR is a member of a family of proteins that also contains HuD (ELAVL4), HuB (ELAVL2), and HuC (ELAVL3). HuB, HuC, and HuD are specifically expressed in neural tissue.<br>HuR participates in apoptosis. During lethal stress HuR becomes mostly cytoplasmic and is a target of Caspase-3 and Caspase-7. The cleavage products of HuR in turn promote apoptosis.
R-HSA-2142850	Hyaluronan biosynthesis and export	Hyaluronan (hyaluronic acid, HA) is composed of repeating disaccharide units of glucuronic acid and N-acetylglucosamine [-4GlcAb1-3GlcNAcb1-]. It is synthesized in the cell membrane by adding monosaccharides to the reducing end of the chain using the precursors UDP-glucuronic acid and UDP-N-acetylglucosamine in the presence of Mg2+. The integral membrane dual-action glycosyltransferase proteins hyaluronan synthases, of which vertebrates have three types (HAS1-3), catalyze these monosaccharide additions. Unlike other GAGs, HA is synthesized as a free glycan, not attached to a protein (Laurent 1987, Weigel & DeAngelis, 2007). As HA is synthesised it is extruded from the cell by an ABC-type transporter into the extracellular medium.
R-HSA-2142845	Hyaluronan metabolism	Hyaluronan (hyaluronic acid, hyaluronate or HA) is an anionic glycosaminoglycan (GAG) distributed widely throughout connective, epithelial, and neural tissues and most abundant in the extracellular matrix and skin. HA is unique among the GAGs in that it is not sulfated and is not found covalently attached to proteins as a proteoglycan. HA polymers are very large (they can reach molecular weights of 10 million Da) and can displace a large volume of water making them excellent lubricators and shock absorbers. Another unique feature of HA is that it is synthesized at the plasma membrane unlike other GAGs which are formed in the Golgi. HA is a polymer of the disaccharide unit D-glucuronic acid and D-N-acetylglucosamine, linked via alternating beta-1,4 and beta-1,3 glycosidic bonds (Toole 2000, 2004, Volpi et al. 2009).
R-HSA-2160916	Hyaluronan uptake and degradation	Hyaluronan (HA) turnover can occur locally at the tissue of origin, where it is taken up by cells to be degraded, or released into the lymphatic and vascular systems, where it can be eliminated by the liver and kidneys. Uptake of HA into cells for degradation involves receptor-mediated processes. Once HA enters lysosomes, the acidic conditions favour hyaluronidases to cleave it into small oligosaccharides, the most common size being a tetrasaccharide. Beta-glucuronidases participate in degrading the small oligosaccharides in the lysosome. Ultimately, HA is degraded into its constituent sugars (glucuronic acid and N-acetylglucosamine) which can be used to reform many glycosaminoglycans (GAGs) when released from the lysosome.<br>A third of the total HA content in humans is turned over daily and it has a short half life of minutes in circulation up to days in many tissues. The reasons why the body eliminates HA so rapidly are unknown but one possible explanation could be HA's role as a reactive oxygen species (ROS) scavenger. Removing these toxic compounds could explain the rapid elimination of HA (Lepperdinger et al. 2004, Menzel & Farr 1998, Erickson & Stern 2012, Stern 2003).
R-HSA-1483115	Hydrolysis of LPC	Lysophosphatidylcholine (LPC) is hydrolyzed by phospholipases to produce glycerophosphocholine (GPCho) which is in turn hydrolyzed by glycerophosphocholine phosphodiesterase to produce choline (Cho) and glycerol-3-phosphate (G3P) (Yamashita et al. 2009, Yamashita et al. 2005, Ghomashchi et al. 2010).
R-HSA-1483152	Hydrolysis of LPE	Lysophosphatidylethanolamine (LPE) is hydrolyzed by phospholipases to produce glycerophosphoethanolamine (GPETA) which is in turn hydrolyzed by glycerophosphocholine phosphodiesterase to produce ethanolamine (ETA) and glycerol-3-phosphate (G3P) (Yamashita et al. 2009, Yamashita et al. 2005).
R-HSA-3296197	Hydroxycarboxylic acid-binding receptors	The G-protein-coupled receptors Hydroxy-carboxylic acid receptor 1 (HCAR1, GPR81), HCAR2 (GPR109A), and HCAR3 (GPR109B) have significant sequence homology and are encoded by clustered genes. Their endogenous ligands are hydroxy-carboxylic acid metabolites. HCAR1 is activated by lactate (2-hydroxy-propanoic acid). HCAR2 is a receptor for 3-hydroxy-butyric acid. HCAR3 is activated by 3-hydroxy-octanoic acid. HCAR1 and HCAR2 are found in most mammalian species; HCA3 is found only in higher primates. All three receptors are expressed in adipocytes and are coupled to Gi-type G-proteins, mediating antilipolytic effects in fat cells. HCAR2 and HCAR3 are also expressed in a variety of immune cells. HCAR2 is a receptor for the antidyslipidemic drug nicotinic acid (niacin) and related natural and synthetic compounds.
R-HSA-204626	Hypusine synthesis from eIF5A-lysine	Cytosolic eIF5A undergoes a unique two-step post-translational modification at Lys 50 via deoxyhypusine (Dhp) to hypusine (Hyp). In the first step deoxyhypusine synthase transfers the aminobutyl group of spermidine to the epsilon-amino group of lysine 50, using NAD+ as a cofactor. Hydroxylation of the C2 of the newly added moiety in the second step is catalyzed by deoxyhypusine hydroxylase/monooxygenase with molecular oxygen as the source. The molecular function of eIF5A is unknown, but the protein is required for viability in eukaryotic cells and its normal function requires hypusinylation. eIF5A is the only protein known to undergo hypusinylation (Park 2006).
R-HSA-2428924	IGF1R signaling cascade	After autophosphorylation the type 1 insulin-like growth factor receptor (IGF1R) binds and phosphorylates scaffold proteins, IRS1/2/4 and SHC1, which in turn bind effectors possessing enzymatic activity (recently reviewed in Pavelic et al. 2007, Chitnis et al. 2008, Maki et al. 2010, Parrella et al. 2010, and Siddle et al. 2012). IRS1/2/4 can bind both PI3K (via the p85 subunit of PI3K) and the GRB2:SOS complex. PI3K activates PKB (AKT, AKT1) signaling. GRB:SOS stimulates RAS to exchange GDP for GTP leading to activation of RAF and MAPK.
R-HSA-5603029	IkBA variant leads to EDA-ID	The nuclear factor kappa B (NFkB) family of transcription factors is kept inactive in the cytoplasm by the inhibitor of kappa B (IkB) family members IKBA (IkB alpha), IKBB (IkB beta) and IKBE (IkB epsilon) (Oeckinghaus A and Ghosh S 2009). Multiple stimuli such as inflammatory cytokines, microbial products or various types of stress activate NFkB signaling leading to stimuli-induced phosphorylation of IkB molecule (Scherer DC et al. 1995; Alkalay I et al. 1995; Lawrence T 2009; Hoesel B and Schmid JA 2013). The phosphorylation of IkB proteins triggers their polyubiquitination and subsequent degradation by 26S proteasome, allowing free NFkB dimer to translocate to the nucleus where it directs the expression of target genes. Studies have identified an autosomal dominant form of ectodermal dysplasia with immunodeficiency (AD-EDA-ID) caused by a hypermorphic heterozygous mutation of NFKBIA/IKBA gene. The IKBA defects prevent the phosphorylation and degradation of IKBA protein resulting in gain-of-function condition with the enhanced inhibitory capacity of IKBA in sequestering NF?B dimers in the cytoplasm (Courtois G et al. 2003; Lopes-Granados E et al. 2008; Schimke LF et al. 2013).
R-HSA-5602636	IKBKB deficiency causes SCID	Four patients with early-onset, life-threatening microbial infections and failure to thrive were found to carry a homozygous duplication c.1292dupG in exon 13 of IKBKB gene that results in a lack of expression of IKBKB (Pannicke U et al. 2013). IKBKB deficiency is associated with severe combined immunodeficiency (SCID), a health condition characterized by low levels of immunoglobulins (hypogammaglobulinemia). Further phenotype assessment revealed that patients peripheral-blood B cells and T cells had normal counts but were almost exclusively of naive phenotype. Regulatory T cells and gamma delta T cells were absent. 
R-HSA-5603027	IKBKG deficiency causes anhidrotic ectodermal dysplasia with immunodeficiency (EDA-ID) (via TLR)	Many signaling pathways rely on the activation of nuclear factor kappa B (NFkB), which is critical for the induction of the appropriate cellular function in response to various stimuli such as inflammatory cytokines, microbial products or various types of stress (Lawrence T 2009; Hoesel B and Schmid JA 2013). The NFkB family of transcription factors is kept inactive in the cytoplasm by inhibitor of kappa B (IkB) family members (Oeckinghaus A and Ghosh S 2009). Canonical NFkB activation depends on the phosphorylation of IkB by the I kappa B kinase (IKK) complex, which contains two catalytic subunits named IKK alpha, IKK beta and a regulatory subunit named NFkB essential modulator (NEMO or IKBKG) (Rothwarf DM et al. 1998). Phosphorylation of IkB leads to K48-linked ubiquitination and proteasomal degradation of IkB, allowing translocation of NFkB factor to the nucleus, where it can activate transcription of a variety of genes participating in the immune and inflammatory response, cell adhesion, growth control, and protection against apoptosis (Collins T et al. 1995; Kaltschmidt B et al. 2000; Lawrence T 2009).<p>IKBKG is encoded by an X-linked gene. Null alleles of the gene are lethal in hemizygous males, whereas hypomorphic alleles typically result in the impaired NFkB signaling in patients with a broad spectrum of clinical phenotypes in terms of both developmental defects and immunodeficiency (Dffinger R et al. 2001; Hanson EP et al. 2008). Several categories of mutations affecting IKBKG have been reported in humans (Dffinger R et al. 2001; Vinolo E et al. 2006; Fusko F et al. 2008). The first category of these mutations consists of hypomorphic mutations typically involving the zinc finger domain and nearby C-terminal regions and causing hypohidrotic ectodermal dysplasia with immune deficiency (HED-ID) in males (Jain A et al. 2001; Shifera AS 2010). The second category consists of amorphic mutations causing incontinentia pigmenti (IP) in females and, generally, prenatal death in males (Aradhya S et al. 2001; Fusco F et al. 2004). The third category is composed of hypomorphic mutations involving the stop codon causing anhidrotic ectodermal dysplasia with immunodeficiency (EDA-ID), osteopetrosis and lymphedema (OL-EDA-ID) in males (Dffinger R et al. 2001). Also some patients with a defective IKBKG gene can develop immunodeficiency without ectodermal dysplasia (Orange JS et al. 2004). This module describes several EDA-ID-associated hypomorphic IKBKG mutations that have been reported to affect inflammatory responses initiated by toll like receptors (TLR).
R-HSA-937041	IKK complex recruitment mediated by RIP1	Receptor-interacting protein 1 (RIP1) mediates the activation of proinflammatory cytokines via intermediate induction of IKK complex in NFkB pathways [Ea et al. 2006]. Poly(I-C) treatment stimulated the recruitment of RIP1, TRAF6, and TAK1 to the TLR3 receptor complex in human embryonic kidney HEK293 transfected with FLAG-tagged TLR3 [Cusson-Hermance et al. 2005]. RIP1 was shown to be dispensable for TRIF-dependent activation of IRF3, which occurs in a TRIF/TBK1/IKKi-dependent manner [Cusson-Hermance et al. 2005, Sato et al. 2003]
R-HSA-168256	Immune System	Humans are exposed to millions of potential pathogens daily, through contact, ingestion, and inhalation. Our ability to avoid infection depends on the adaptive immune system and during the first critical hours and days of exposure to a new pathogen, our innate immune system.
R-HSA-198933	Immunoregulatory interactions between a Lymphoid and a non-Lymphoid cell	A number of receptors and cell adhesion molecules play a key role in modifying the response of cells of lymphoid origin (such as B-, T- and NK cells) to self and tumor antigens, as well as to pathogenic organisms.<p><p>Molecules such as KIRs and LILRs form part of a crucial surveillance system that looks out for any derangement, usually caused by cancer or viral infection, in MHC Class I presentation. Somatic cells are also able to report internal functional impairment by displaying surface stress markers such as MICA. The presence of these molecules on somatic cells is picked up by C-lectin NK immune receptors.<p><p>Lymphoid cells are able to regulate their location and movement in accordance to their state of activation, and home in on tissues expressing the appropriate complementary ligands. For example, lymphoid cells may fine tune the presence and concentration of adhesion molecules belonging to the IgSF, Selectin and Integrin class that interact with a number of vascular markers of inflammation.<p><p>Furthermore, there are a number of avenues through which lymphoid cells may interact with antigen. This may be presented directly to a specific T-cell receptor in the context of an MHC molecule. Antigen-antibody complexes may anchor to the cell via a small number of lymphoid-specific Fc receptors that may, in turn, influence cell function further. Activated complement factor C3d binds to both antigen and to cell surface receptor CD21. In such cases, the far-reaching influence of CD19 on B-lymphocyte function is tempered by its interaction with CD21.
R-HSA-200425	Import of palmitoyl-CoA into the mitochondrial matrix	The mitochondrial carnitine system catalyzes the transport of long-chain fatty acids into the mitochondrial matrix where they undergo beta oxidation. This transport system consists of the malonyl-CoA sensitive carnitine palmitoyltransferase I (CPT-I) localized in the mitochondrial outer membrane, the carnitine:acylcarnitine translocase, an integral inner membrane protein, and carnitine palmitoyltransferase II localized on the matrix side of the inner membrane. (Kerner and Hoppel, 2000).
R-HSA-141430	Inactivation of APC/C via direct inhibition of the APC/C complex	In the direct inhibition model, the cytosolic Mitotic Checkpoint Complex, consisting of hBUBR1, hBUB3, Cdc20 and Mad2, directly inhibits APC/C by binding to it.
R-HSA-428543	Inactivation of Cdc42 and Rac	Rho family GTPases including Rac, Rho, and Cdc42 are ideal candidates to regulate aspects of cytoskeletal dynamics downstream of axon guidance receptors. Biochemical and genetic studies have revealed an important role for Cdc42 and Rac in Robo repulsion. Robo controls the activity of Rho GTPases by interacting with a family of Slit/Robo specific GAPs (SrGAPs) and Vilse/CrossGAP. SrGAPs inactivate Cdc42 and Vilse/CrossGAP specifically inactivates Rac1.
R-HSA-2514859	Inactivation, recovery and regulation of the phototransduction cascade	To terminate the single photon response and restore the system to its basal state, the three activated intermediates in phototransduction, rhodopsin (MII), transducin alpha subunit with GTP bound (GNAT1-GTP) and phosphodiesterase 6 (PDE6) all need to be efficiently deactivated. In addition, the cGMP concentrations must be restored to support reopening of the CNG channels. This section describes the inactivation and recovery events of the activated intermediates involved in phototransduction (Burns & Pugh 2010, Korenbrot 2012).
R-HSA-400508	Incretin synthesis, secretion, and inactivation	Incretins are peptide hormones produced by the gut that enhance the ability of glucose to stimulate insulin secretion from beta cells in the pancreas. Two incretins have been identified: Glucagon-like Peptide-1 (GLP-1) and Glucose-dependent Insulinotropic Polypeptide (GIP, initially named Gastric Inhibitory Peptide). Both are released by cells of the small intestine, GLP-1 from L cells and GIP from K cells.<br>The control of incretin secretion is complex. Fatty acids, phospholipids, glucose, acetylcholine, leptin, and Gastrin-releasing Peptide all stimulate secretion of GLP-1. Fatty acids and phospholipids are the primary stimulants of secretion of GIP in humans (carbohydrates have more effect in rodents).<br>Incretins secreted into the bloodstream are subject to rapid inactivation by Dipeptidyl Peptidase IV (DPP IV), which confers half-lives of only a few minutes onto GLP-1 and GIP. Inhibitors of DPP IV, for example sitagliptin, are now being used in the treatment of Type 2 diabetes.
R-HSA-622312	Inflammasomes	In contrast to NOD1/2 some NLRPs function as large macromolecular complexes called 'Inflammasomes'. These multiprotein platforms control activation of the cysteinyl aspartate protease caspase-1 and thereby the subsequent cleavage of pro-interleukin 1B (pro-IL1B) into the active proinflammatory cytokine IL1B. Activation of caspase-1 is essential for production of IL1B and IL18, which respectively bind and activate the IL1 receptor (IL1R) and IL18 receptor (IL18R) complexes. IL1R and IL18R activate NFkappaB and other signaling cascades.<br><br>As the activation of inflammasomes leads to caspase-1 activation, inflammasomes can be considered an upstream step of the IL1R and IL18R signaling cascades, linking intracellular pathogen sensing to immune response pathways mediated by Toll-Like Receptors (TLRs). Monocytes and macrophages do not express pro-IL1B until stimulated, typically by TLRs (Franchi et al. 2009). The resulting pro-IL1B is not converted to IL1B unless a second stimulus activates an inflammasome. This requirement for two distinct stimuli allows tight regulation of IL1B/IL18 production, necessary because excessive IL-1B production is associated with numerous inflammatory diseases such as gout and rheumatoid arthritis (Masters et al. 2009).<br><br>There are at least four subtypes of the inflammasome, characterized by the NLRP. In addition the protein AIM2 can form an inflammasome. All activate caspase-1. NLRP1 (NALP1), NLRP3 (Cryopyrin, NALP3), IPAF (CARD12, NLRC4) and AIM2 inflammasomes all have clear physiological roles in vivo. NLRP2, NLRP6, NLRP7, NLRP10 and NLRP12 have been demonstrated to modulate caspase-1 activity in vitro but the significance of this is unclear (Mariathasan and Monack, 2007).<br><br>NLRP3 and AIM2 bind the protein 'apoptosis-associated speck-like protein containing a CARD' (ASC, also called PYCARD), via a PYD-PYD domain interaction. This in turn recruits procaspase-1 through a CARD-CARD interaction. NLRP1 and IPAF contain CARD domains and can bind procaspase-1 directly, though both are stimulated by ASC. Oligomerization of NLRPs is believed to bring procaspases into close proximity, leading to 'induced proximity' auto-activation (Boatright et al. 2003). This leads to formation of the active caspase tetramer. NLRPs are generally considered to be cytoplasmic proteins, but there is evidence for cytoplasmic-nuclear shuttling of the family member CIITA (LeibundGut-Landmann et al. 2004) and tissue/cell dependent NALP1 expression in the nucleus of neurons and lymphocytes (Kummer et al. 2007); the significance of this remains unclear. 
R-HSA-168254	Influenza Infection	For centuries influenza epidemics have plagued man, and influenza was probably the disease described by Hippocrates in 412 BC. Today it remains a major cause of morbidity and mortality worldwide with large segments of the human population affected every year. Many animal species can be infected by influenza viruses, often with catastrophic consequences. A continuing threat is the possibility of a pandemic similar to that experienced in 1918, estimated to have been responsible for 50 million deaths worldwide.<p>Influenza viruses belong to the family of Orthomyxoviridae; viruses with segmented RNA genomes that are negative sense and single-stranded (Baltimore 1971).<p>Influenza virus strains are named according to their type (A, B, or C), the species from which the virus was isolated (omitted if human), location of isolate, the number of the isolate, the year of isolation, and in the case of influenza A viruses, the hemagglutinin (H) and neuraminidase (N) subtype. For example, the virus of H5N1 subtype isolated from chickens in Hong Kong in 1997 is: influenza A/chicken/Hong Kong/220/97(H5N1) virus. Currently 16 different hemagglutinin (H1 to H16) subtypes and 9 different neuraminidase (N1 to N9) subtypes are known for influenza A viruses. Most human disease is due to Influenza viruses of the A type, so the events of Influenza infection have been annotated in Reactome with reference to this type.
R-HSA-168255	Influenza Life Cycle	The virus particle initially associates with a human host cell by binding to sialic acid-containing receptors on the host cell surface. The bound virus is endocytosed by one of four distinct mechanisms. The low endosomal pH sets in motion a number of steps that lead to viral membrane fusion mediated by the viral hemagglutinin (HA) protein, and the eventual release of the uncoated viral ribonucleoprotein complex into the cytosol of the host cell. The ribonucleoprotein complex is transported through the nuclear pore into the nucleus. Once in the nucleus, the incoming negative-sense viral RNA (vRNA) is transcribed into messenger RNA (mRNA) by a primer-dependent mechanism. Replication occurs via a two step process. A full-length complementary RNA (cRNA), a positive-sense copy of the vRNA, is first made and this in turn is used as a template to produce more vRNA. The viral proteins are expressed and processed and eventually assemble with vRNAs at budding sites within the host cell membrane. The viral protein complexes and ribonucleoproteins are assembled into viral particles and bud from the host cell, enveloped in the host cell's membrane.<p>This release contains a framework for the further annotation of the viral life-cycle.
R-HSA-168273	Influenza Viral RNA Transcription and Replication	In the host cell nucleus, the viral negative-strand RNA (vRNA) serves as a template for the synthesis both of capped, polyadenylated viral messenger RNA and of full-length positive-strand RNA or complementary RNA (cRNA). The cRNA is associated with the same viral proteins as the vRNA. It serves as a template for the synthesis of new vRNA molecules, which in turn serve as a template for mRNA particularly early in infection, and cRNA. Viral RNA polymerase subunits (PB1, PB2, and PA) and nucleoprotein (NP) enter the host cell nucleus and catalyze all three of these reactions. During initial infection, these proteins enter the nucleus as part of the viral RNP complex. After the first round of viral mRNA synthesis (primary transcription) and translation, newly synthesized viral polymerase proteins and NP localize to the nucleus to catalyze further mRNA transcription and vRNA/cRNA replication. Late in the infection process, the synthesis of vRNA and nuclear export of newly synthesized vRNP (vRNA complexed with NP and viral polymerase) is increased relative to transcription (Krug, 1981; Braam, 1983; Kawakami, 1983; Huang, 1990; Cros, 2003; Fodor, 2004; Deng, 2005; Amorim, 2006; reviewed in Neumann, 2004; Engelhardt, 2006; Buolo, 2006).
R-HSA-168277	Influenza Virus Induced Apoptosis	Influenza A virus induces apoptosis in a variety of ways including activation of host TGF-beta by expression of viral NA, M1 and M2 proteins, and by the binding of viral PB1-F2 to host mitochondrial adenine nucleotide translocator 3 (ANT3).
R-HSA-997272	Inhibition  of voltage gated Ca2+ channels via Gbeta/gamma subunits	GABA B receptors are coupled to Gproteins and function by increasing the K+ and decreasing the Ca2+ inside the cell. The increase in K+ increases the negative membrane potential of the cell thereby hyper polarizing the cell which inhibits the release of neurotransmitters. The decrease in Ca2+ also inhibits neurotransmitter in two ways; first by preventing the fusion of synaptic vesicles containing the neurotransmitter with the plasma membrane and second by decreasing the Ca2+ dependent recruitment of synaptic vesicles to the plasma membrane. In particular GABA B receptors inhibit voltage gated Ca2+ channels via the activity of Gbeta/Ggamma subunits of G proteins.
R-HSA-997269	Inhibition of adenylate cyclase pathway	GABA B receptors are G protein coupled receptors that are activated by GABA binding to the B1 subunit and B2 subunit alters the activity of adenylate cyclase by interacting with the G alpha i/alpha 0 subunit of the pertussis toxin sensitive G protein. The activation of GABA B receptors results in the inhibition of adenylate cyclase activity decreasing the levels of cyclic AMP production and hence the activity of Protein kinase A.
R-HSA-168315	Inhibition of Host mRNA Processing and RNA Silencing	The Influenza Virus NS1 protein inhibits the cleavage and polyadenylation specificity factor CPSF and the PABII components of the host cell 3' end processing machinery, preventing efficient 3' end processing of host pre-mRNAs. NS1 also inhibits the splicing of pre-mRNAs, resulting in their retention within the host cell nucleus.
R-HSA-168888	Inhibition of IFN-beta	Since the presence of intracellular dsRNA serves as the signal for virus infection and triggers host interferon (IFN) synthesis the simplest model for viral NS1 protein function is that it sequesters dsRNA and thus prevents the downstream signaling required to activate IRF-3, NF-kB and AP-1. These findings are strongly supported by mutational analyses of NS1 that indicate that the IFN antagonist properties of NS1 depend on its ability to bind dsRNA. However, a compensatory mutation (S42G), which was acquired during the passaging of the mutant RNA-binding virus, results in partial restoration of wild-type phenotype but does not restore RNA binding. This indicates that the ability of NS1 to inhibit IFN synthesis is not solely dependent on dsRNA binding and that additional mechanisms may be involved.
R-HSA-168305	Inhibition of Interferon Synthesis	Interferon Synthesis is inhibited.
R-HSA-169131	Inhibition of PKR	The key role played by PKR in the innate response to virus infection is emphasized by the large number of viruses that encode PKR inhibitors.
R-HSA-5638303	Inhibition of Signaling by Overexpressed EGFR	Recombinant monoclonal antibody Cetuximab acts as an antagonist of EGFR ligand binding, and is approved for the treatment of tumors that over-express wild-type EGFR receptor (Cunningham et al. 2004, Li et al. 2005, Burtness et al. 2005). Effective concentrations of covalent tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs) inhibit wild-type EGFR, causing severe side effects (Zhou et al. 2009). Hence, covalent TKIs have not shown much promise in clinical trials (Reviewed by Pao and Chmielecki in 2010).
R-HSA-141405	Inhibition of the proteolytic activity of APC/C required for the onset of anaphase by mitotic spindle checkpoint components	The target of the mitotic checkpoint is the Anaphase Promoting Complex/Cyclosome (APC/C) an E3 ubiquitin ligase that targets proteins whose destruction is essential for mitotic exit. Currently, there are two proposed mechanism by which inhibition of the APC/C is achieved. These mechanisms differ depending on the mechanism of signal transduction. The APC/C may be inhibited directly by association with the Mitotic Checkpoint Complex (MCC) or through the sequestration of its activator, Cdc20. 
R-HSA-165181	Inhibition of TSC complex formation by PKB	Phosphorylation of TSC2 by PKB disrupts TSC1/TSC2 heterodimer formation (Hay & Sonenberg 2004). TSC2 function is affected in at least two ways: first, phosphorylation decreases the activity of TSC2; second, phosphorylation destabilizes the TSC2 protein. This destabilization is achieved by disrupting complex formation between TSC1 and TSC2 and inducing ubiquination of the free TSC2 (Inoki et al. 2002). Phosphorylation of complexed TSC2 by PKB induces degradation of both TSC1 and TSC2 through the proteosome pathway (Dan et al. 2002). Phosphorylation of complexed TSC2 by PKB may therefore result in the dissociation of the TSC1:TSC2 complex (Proud 2002).
R-HSA-166663	Initial triggering of complement	Complement activation is due to a cascade of proteolytic steps, performed by serine protease domains in some of the components. Three different pathways of activation are distinguished triggered by target-bound antibody (the classical pathway); microbial polysaccharide structures (the lectin pathway); or recognition of other "foreign" surface structures (the alternative pathway) by C3b. All three merge in the pivotal activation of C3 and, subsequently, of C5 by highly specific enzymatic complexes, the so-called C3/C5 convertases. A complement system with three C3 activation pathways and a common lytic pathway is found only in jawed vertebrates.
R-HSA-2995383	Initiation of Nuclear Envelope Reformation	Reassembly of the nuclear envelope is initiated at late anaphase/early telophase when BANF1 (BAF) accumulates on the decondensing chromosome mass close to the spindle ('core' region), together with EMD (emerin), TMPO (LAP2beta), LEMD3 (MAN1), LEMD2 (LEM2) and lamin A (Haraguchi et al. 2008, reviewed by Guttinger et al. 2009).
R-HSA-168249	Innate Immune System	Innate immunity encompases the nonspecific part of immunity tha are part of an individual's natural biologic makeup
R-HSA-1483249	Inositol phosphate metabolism	Inositol phosphates (IPs) are molecules involves in signalling processes in eukaryotes. myo-Inositol consists of a six-carbon cyclic alcohol with an axial 2-hydroxy and five equatorial hydroxyls. Mono-, di-, and triphosphorylation of the inositol ring generates a wide variety of stereochemically distinct signalling entities. Inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate (I(1,4,5)P3), is formed when the phosphoinositide phosphatidylinositol 4,5-bisphosphate (PI(4,5)P2) is hydrolysed by a phospholipase C isozyme. An array of inositol trisphosphate (IP3) and tetrakisphosphate (IP4) molecules are synthesised by the action of various kinases and phosphatases in the cytosol. These species then transport between the cytosol and the nucleus where they are acted on by inositol polyphosphate multikinase (IPMK), inositol-pentakisphosphate 2-kinase (IPPK), inositol hexakisphosphate kinase 1 (IP6K1) and 2 (IP6K2), to produce IP5, IP6, IP7, and IP8 molecules. Some of these nuclear produced IPs transport back to the cytosol where they are converted to an even wider variety of IPs, by kinases and phosphatases, including the di- and triphospho inositol phosphates aka pyrophosphates (Irvine & Schell 2001, Bunney & Katan 2010, Alcazar-Romain & Wente 2008, York 2006, Monserrate and York 2010).
R-HSA-429593	Inositol transporters	Myo-Inositol is a neutral cyclic polyol, abundant in mammalian tissues. It plays important roles; it is a precursor to phosphatidylinositols (PtdIns) and to the inositol phosphates (IP), which serve as second messengers and as key regulators of many cell functions. It can also serve as a compatible osmolyte during volume regulation in many tissues where cells are exposed to hyperosmotic conditions. Three members of the glucose transporter families are inositol transporters. Two (SMIT1 and SMIT2) couple myo-inositol transport with two Na+ ions. Unlike SMIT1, SMIT2 also transports D-chiro_inositol. The third transporter (HMIT), couples myo-inositol transport with a proton.
R-HSA-163754	Insulin effects increased synthesis of Xylulose-5-Phosphate	One of the downstream effects of insulin, mediated via protein phosphatase 2A (PP2A), is increased synthesis of Fructose-2,6-bisphosphate, an allosteric activator of phosphofructokinase 1 (PFK1). PFK1 in turn catalyzes the committed step of glycolysis so the net effect of this whole sequence of events set off by insulin is to increase cytosolic concentrations of the small molecules formed in the course of glycolysis. This in turn drives the increased synthesis of Xylulose-5-phosphate, itself a positive regulator of PP2A.
R-HSA-264876	Insulin processing	The generation of insulin-containing secretory granules from proinsulin in the lumen of the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) can be described in 4 steps: formation of intramolecular disulfide bonds, formation of proinsulin-zinc-calcium complexes, proteolytic cleavage of proinsulin to yield insulin, translocation of the granules across the cytosol to the plasma membrane.<br>Transcription of the human insulin gene INS is activated by 4 important transcription factors: Pdx-1, MafA, Beta2/NeuroD1, and E47. The transcription factors interact with each other at the promoters of the insulin gene and act synergistically to promote transcription. Expression of the transcription factors is upregulated in response to glucose.<br>The preproinsulin mRNA is translated by ribosomes at the rough endoplasmic reticulum (ER) and the preproinsulin enters the secretion pathway by virtue of its signal peptide, which is cleaved during translation to yield proinsulin. Evidence indicates that the preproinsulin mRNA is stabilized by glucose.<br>In the process annotated in detail here, within the ER, three intramolecular disulfide bonds form between cysteine residues in the proinsulin. Formation of the bonds is the spontaneous result of the conformation of proinsulin and the oxidizing environment of the ER, which is maintained by Ero1-like alpha<br>The cystine bonded proinsulin then moves via vesicles from the ER to the Golgi Complex. High concentrations of zinc are maintained in the Golgi by zinc transporters ZnT5, ZnT6, and ZnT7 and the proinsulin forms complexes with zinc and calcium.<br>Proinsulin-zinc-calcium complexes bud in vesicles from the trans-Golgi to form immature secretory vesicles (secretory granules) in the cytosol. Within the immature granules the endoproteases Prohormone Convertase 1/3 and Prohormone Convertase 2 cleave at two sites of the proinsulin and Carboxypeptidase E removes a further 4 amino acid residues to yield the cystine-bonded A and B chains of mature insulin and the C peptide, which will also be secreted with the insulin. The insulin-zinc-calcium complexes form insoluble crystals within the granule<br>The insulin-containing secretory granules are then translocated across the cytosol to the inner surface of the plasma membrane. Translocation occurs initially by attachment of the granules to Kinesin-1, which motors along microtubules, and then by attachment to Myosin Va, which motors along the microfilaments of the cortical actin network.<br>A pancreatic beta cell contains about 10000 insulin granules of which about 1000 are docked at the plasma membrane and 50 are readily releasable in immediate response to stimulation by glucose or other secretogogues. Docking is due to interaction between the Exocyst proteins EXOC3 on the granule membrane and EXOC4 on the plasma membrane. Exocytosis is accomplished by interaction between SNARE-type proteins Syntaxin 1A and Syntaxin 4 on the plasma membrane and Synaptobrevin-2/VAMP2 on the granule membrane. Exocytosis is a calcium-dependent process due to interaction of the calcium-binding membrane protein Synaptotagmin V/IX with the SNARE-type proteins.
R-HSA-77387	Insulin receptor recycling	Triggered by acidification of the endosome, insulin dissociates from the receptor and is degraded. The receptor is dephosphorylated and re-integrated into the plasma membrane, ready to be activated again by the binding of insulin molecules.
R-HSA-74751	Insulin receptor signalling cascade	Autophosphorylation of the insulin receptor triggers a series of signalling events, mediated by SHC or IRS, and resulting in activation of the Ras/RAF and MAP kinase cascades. A second effect of the autophosphorylation of the insulin receptor is its internalisation into an endosome, which downregulates its signalling activity.
R-HSA-428359	Insulin-like Growth Factor-2 mRNA Binding Proteins (IGF2BPs/IMPs/VICKZs) bind RNA	Insulin-like Growth Factor-2 mRNA Binding Proteins (IGF2BPs) bind specific sets of RNA and regulate their translation, stability, and subcellular localization. IGF2BP1, IGF2BP2, and IGF2BP3 bind about 8400 protein-coding transcripts. The target RNAs contain the sequence motif CAUH (where H is A, U, or, C) and binding of IGFBPs increases the stability of the target RNAs.
R-HSA-163685	Integration of energy metabolism	Many hormones that affect individual physiological processes including the regulation of appetite, absorption, transport, and oxidation of foodstuffs influence energy metabolism pathways. While <b>insulin</b> mediates the storage of excess nutrients, <b>glucagon</b> is involved in the mobilization of energy resources in response to low blood glucose levels, principally by stimulating hepatic glucose output. Small doses of glucagon are sufficient to induce significant glucose elevations. These hormone-driven regulatory pathways enable the body to sense and respond to changed amounts of nutrients in the blood and demands for energy.<br>Glucagon and Insulin act through various metabolites and enzymes that target specific steps in metabolic pathways for sugar and fatty acids. The processes responsible for the long-term control of fat synthesis and short term control of glycolysis by key metabolic products and enzymes are annotated in this module as six specific pathways:<br><b>Pathway 1. Glucagon signalling in metabolic pathways:</b> In response to low blood glucose, pancreatic alpha-cells release glucagon. The binding of glucagon to its receptor results in increased cAMP synthesis, and Protein Kinase A (PKA) activation.<br><b>Pathway 2. PKA mediated phosphorylation:</b>PKA phosphorylates key enzymes, e.g., 6-Phosphofructo-2-kinase /Fructose-2,6-bisphosphatase (PF2K-Pase) at serine 36, and regulatory proteins, e.g., Carbohydrate Response Element Binding Protein (ChREBP) at serine 196 and threonine 666.<br>Insulin mediated responses to high blood glucose will be annotated in future versions of Reactome. In brief, the binding of insulin to its receptor leads to increased protein phosphatase activity and to hydrolysis of cAMP by cAMP phosphodiesterase. These events counteract the regulatory effects of glucagon.<br><b>Pathway 3: Insulin stimulates increased synthesis of Xylulose-5-phosphate (Xy-5-P)</b>. Activation of the insulin receptor results indirectly in increased Xy-5-P synthesis from Glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate and Fructose-6-phosphate. Xy-5-P, a metabolite of the pentose phosphate pathway, stimulates protein phosphatase PP2A.<br><b>Pathway 4: AMP Kinase (AMPK) mediated response to high AMP:ATP ratio:</b> In response to diet with high fat content or low energy levels, the cytosolic AMP:ATP ratio is increased. AMP triggers a complicated cascade of events. In this module we have annotated only the phosphorylation of ChREBP by AMPK at serine 568, which inactivates this transcription factor.<br><b>Pathway 5: Dephosphorylation of key metabolic factors by PP2A: </b>Xy-5-P activated PP2A efficiently dephosphorylates phosphorylated PF2K-Pase resulting in the higher output of F-2,6-P2 that enhances PFK activity in the glycolytic pathway. PP2A also dephosphorylates (and thus activates) cytosolic and nuclear ChREBP.<br><b>Pathway 6: Transcriptional activation of metabolic genes by ChREBP:</b> Dephosphorylated ChREBP activates the transcription of genes involved in glucose metabolism such as pyruvate kinase, and lipogenic genes such as acetyl-CoA carboxylase, fatty acid synthetase, acyl CoA synthase and glycerol phosphate acyl transferase.<br> The illustration below summarizes this network of events. Black lines are metabolic reactions, red lines are negative regulatory events, and green lines are positive regulatory events (figure reused with permission from Veech (2003) - Copyright (2003) National Academy of Sciences, U.S.A.).
R-HSA-162592	Integration of provirus	For retroviral DNA to direct production of progeny virions it must become covalently integrated into the host cell chromosome (reviewed in Coffin et al. 1997; Hansen et al. 1998). Analyses of mutants have identified the viral integrase coding region (part of the retroviral pol gene) as essential for the integration process (Donehower 1988; Donehower and Varmus 1984; Panganiban and Temin 1984; Quinn and Grandgenett 1988; Schwartzberg et al. 1984). Also essential are regions at the ends of the viral long terminal repeats (LTRs) that serve as recognition sites for integrase protein (Colicelli and Goff 1985, 1988; Panganiban and Temin 1983).<p>The viral genomic RNA is reverse transcribed to form a linear double-stranded DNA molecule, the precursor to the integrated provirus (Brown et al. 1987, 1989; Fujiwara and Mizuuchi 1988). The provirus is colinear with unintegrated linear viral DNA (Dhar et al. 1980; Hughes et al. 1978) but differs from the reverse transcription product in that it is missing two bases from each end (Hughes et al. 1981). Flanking the integrated HIV provirus are direct repeats of the cellular DNA that are 5 base pairs in length (Vincent et al. 1990). This duplication of cellular sequences flanking the viral DNA is generated as a consequence of the integration mechanism (Coffin et al., 1997). <p>Linear viral DNA is found in a complex with proteins in the cytoplasm of infected cells. These complexes (termed "preintegration complexes", PICs) can be isolated and have been shown to mediate integration of viral DNA into target DNA in vitro (Bowerman et al. 1989; Brown et al. 1987; Ellison et al. 1990; Farnet and Haseltine 1990, 1991). <p>The development of in vitro assays with purified integrase has allowed its enzymatic functions to be elucidated. The provirus is formed by two reactions catalyzed by the viral integrase: terminal cleavage and strand transfer. Studies with purified integrase have shown that it is sufficient for both 3' end cleavage (Bushman and Craigie 1991; Craigie et al. 1990; Katzman et al. 1989; Sherman and Fyfe 1990) and joining of the viral DNA to the cellular chromosome or naked target DNA (Bushman et al. 1990; Craigie et al. 1990; Katz et al. 1990). HIV integrase catalyze the removal of two bases from the 3' end of each viral DNA strand, leaving recessed 3' hydroxyl groups (Brown et al. 1989; Fujiwara and Mizuuchi 1988; Roth et al. 1989; Sherman and Fyfe 1990). This terminal cleavage reaction is required for proper integration. It may allow the virus to create a standard end from viral DNA termini that can be heterogeneous due to the terminal transferase activity of reverse transcriptase (Miller et al. 1997; Patel and Preston 1994). In addition, the terminal cleavage step is coupled to the formation of a stable integrase-DNA complex (Ellison and Brown 1994; Vink et al. 1994). Following terminal cleavage, a recessed hydroxyl is exposed that immediately follows a CA dinucleotide. More internal LTR sites are also important for integration (Balakrishnan and Jonsson 1997; Bushman and Craigie 1990; Leavitt et al. 1992). After end processing, integrase catalyzes the covalent attachment of hydroxyl groups at the viral DNA termini to protruding 5' phosphoryl ends of the host cell DNA (Brown et al. 1987; Brown et al. 1989; Fujiwara and Mizuuchi 1988). The DNA cleavage and joining reactions involved in integration are shown in the figure below. Both the viral DNA 3' end cleavage and strand transfer reactions are mediated by single-step transesterification chemistry as shown by stereochemical analysis of reaction products (Engelman et al. 1991). Biochemical analysis of purified integrase revealed that it requires a divalent metal - either Mg2+ or Mn2+ - to carry out reactions with model substrates, that probably mediate the reaction chemistry (Bushman and Craigie 1991; Craigie et al. 1990; Katzman et al. 1989; Sherman and Fyfe 1990; Gao et al. 2004).
R-HSA-175567	Integration of viral DNA into host genomic DNA	Following nuclear entry, the viral preintegration complex (PIC) must select a site for integration in a host cell chromosome, and then carry out the chemical steps of the reaction. <p>At the chromosomal level, HIV has been found to favor active transcription units for integration. Subsequent studies established that the cellular PSIP1/LEDGF/p75 protein is important in this reaction. PSIP1/LEDGF/p75 binds tightly to HIV integrase, and also to chromatin. Knocking down PSIP1/LEDGF/p75 in cells resulted in several perturbations of integration targeting in vivo, including reduced integration in transcription units. Thus PSIP1/LEDGF/p75 has been hypothesized to act as a tethering factor that dictates at least in part the placement of HIV integration sites. <p>The integration target DNA is also expected to be coated with nucleosomes. Tests of integration into mononucleosomes in vitro have shown that wrapping integration target DNA actually boosts integration activity. Kinked positions on the DNA gyre are particularly favored for integration. <p>Integration does not take place at a unique sequence in the integration target DNA (i.e. it is not like a restriction enzyme). However, favored and disfavored primary sequences can be detected when many integration sites are aligned. Synthesis and testing of favored HIV integration sites showed that they were favored for integration by PICs in vitro. <p>After a target DNA is bound, the integration reactions take place via a single-step transesterification.<p>Integration of both ends of the viral DNA, followed by melting of the target DNA segments between the points of joining, yields single stranded gaps at each host-virus DNA junction, and a two base overhang derived from the viral DNA. The manner by which this intermediate is subsequently repaired to yield the fully integrated provirus is unclear. For many parasitic DNA replication reactions, the parasite carries out reaction steps only up to a point that the host cannot easily reverse, forcing the host to complete the job (Bushman 2001; Craig et al. 2002). For retroviral integration, it is reasonable to infer that host DNA repair enzymes complete provirus formation. DNA gap repair enzymes are known to be involved in a variety of DNA repair pathways, so their recruitment to gaps at host-virus DNA junctions is readily envisioned. Consistent with this, known gap repair enzymes have been shown to act on model host-virus DNA junctions in vitro (Yoder and Bushman, 2000).
R-HSA-354192	Integrin alphaIIb beta3 signaling	At the sites of vascular injury bioactive molecules such as thrombin, ADP, collagen, fibrinogen and thrombospondin are generated, secreted or exposed. These stimuli activate platelets, converting the major platelet integrin alphaIIbbeta3 from a resting state to an active conformation, in a process termed integrin priming or 'inside-out signalling'. Integrin activation refers to the change required to enhance ligand-binding activity. The activated alphaIIbbeta3 interacts with the fibrinogen and links platelets together in an aggregate to form a platelet plug. AlphaIIbbeta3 bound to fibrin generates more intracellular signals (outside-in signalling), causing further platelet activation and platelet-plug retraction. <br>In the resting state the alpha and beta tails are close together. This interaction keeps the membrane proximal regions in a bent conformation that maintains alphaIIbbeta3 in a low affinity state. <br>Integrin alphaIIbbeta3 is released from its inactive state by interaction with the protein talin. Talin interacts with the beta3 cytoplasmic domain and disrupts the salt bridge between the alpha and beta chains. This separation in the cytoplasmic regions triggers the conformational change in the extracellular domain that increases its affinity to fibrinogen. <br>Much of talin exists in an inactive cytosolic pool, and the Rap1 interacting adaptor molecule (RIAM) is implicated in talin activation and translocation to beta3 integrin cytoplasmic domain.<br>
R-HSA-216083	Integrin cell surface interactions	The extracellular matrix (ECM) is a network of macro-molecules that underlies all epithelia and endothelia and that surrounds all connective tissue cells. This matrix provides the mechanical strength and also influences the behavior and differentiation state of cells in contact with it. The ECM are diverse in composition, but they generally comprise a mixture of fibrillar proteins, polysaccharides synthesized, secreted and organized by neighboring cells. Collagens, fibronectin, and laminins are the principal components involved in cell matrix interactions; other components, such as vitronectin, thrombospondin, and osteopontin, although less abundant, are also important adhesive molecules.<br>Integrins are the receptors that mediate cell adhesion to ECM. Integrins consists of one alpha and one beta subunit forming a noncovalently bound heterodimer. 18 alpha and 8 beta subunits have been identified in humans that combine to form 24 different receptors. <br>The integrin dimers can be broadly divided into three families consisting of the beta1, beta2/beta7, and beta3/alphaV integrins. beta1 associates with 12 alpha-subunits and can be further divided into RGD-, collagen-, or laminin binding and the related alpha4/alpha9 integrins that recognise both matrix and vascular ligands. beta2/beta7 integrins are restricted to leukocytes and mediate cell-cell rather than cell-matrix interactions, although some recognize fibrinogen. The beta3/alphaV family members are all RGD receptors and comprise aIIbb3, an important receptor on platelets, and the remaining b-subunits, which all associate with alphaV. It is the collagen receptors and leukocyte-specific integrins that contain alpha A-domains.
R-HSA-445095	Interaction between L1 and Ankyrins	Ankyrins are a family of adaptor proteins that couple membrane proteins such as voltage gated Na+ channels and the Na+/K+ anion exchanger to the spectrin actin cytoskeleton. Ankyrins are encoded by three genes (ankyrin-G, -B and -R) of which ankyrin-G and -B are the major forms expressed in the developing nervous system. Ankyrins bind to the cytoplasmic domain of L1 CAMs and couple them and ion channel proteins, to the spectrin cytoskeleton. This binding enhances the homophilic adhesive activity of L1 and reduces its mobility within the plasma membrane. L1 interaction with ankyrin mediates branching and synaptogenesis of cortical inhibitory neurons.<br>
R-HSA-2534343	Interaction With Cumulus Cells	A typical mammalian egg is surrounded by an outer layer of about 3,000 cumulus cells embedded in an extracellular matrix rich in hyaluronic acid. It is suggested that the fertilizing sperm with it's acrosome intact, passes through the cumulus cell layer.
R-HSA-1300644	Interaction With The Zona Pellucida	The zona pellucida (ZP), a glycoproteinaceous matrix surrounding the mammalian oocyte plays an important role in species specific sperm-egg binding, induction of acrosome reaction in the ZP bound spermatozoa, avoidance of polyspermy and protection of the embryo prior to implantation. The human ZP matrix is composed of 4 glycoproteins designated as ZP1, ZP2, ZP3 and ZP4.
R-HSA-177243	Interactions of Rev with host cellular proteins	In order to facilitate the transport of incompletely spliced HIV-1 transcripts, Rev shuttles between the cytoplasm and nucleus using host cell transport mechanisms (reviewed in Li et al. 2005). Nuclear import appears to be achieved by the association of Rev with importin-beta and B23 and docking at the nuclear pore through interactions between importin-beta and nucleoporins. The dissociation of Rev with the import machinery and the subsequent export of Rev-associated HIV-1 mRNA complex requires Ran-GTP. Ran GTP associates with importin-beta, displacing its cargo. Crm1 associates with the Rev:RNA complex and Ran:GTP and is believed to interact with nucleoporins facilitating docking of the RRE-Rev-CRM1-RanGTP complex to the nuclear pore and the translocation of the complex across the nuclear pore complex. In the cytoplasm, RanBP1 associates with Ran-GTP causing the Crm1-Rev-Ran-GTP complex to disassemble. The Ran GAP protein promotes the hydrolysis of RanGTP to Ran GDP. The activities of Ran GAP in the cytoplasm and Ran-GEF, which converts RAN-GDP to Ran-GTP in the nucleus, produce a gradient of Ran-GTP/GDP required for this shuttling of Rev and other cellular transport proteins.
R-HSA-176034	Interactions of Tat with host cellular proteins	The elongation of HIV-1 mRNA depends upon the interaction of Tat with the host P-TEFb complex (Hermann and Rice, 1995; Wei et al., 1998).
R-HSA-176033	Interactions of Vpr with host cellular proteins	Vpr has been implicated in multiple processes during HIV-1 replication, including nuclear import of the pre-integration complex (PIC)(Heinzinger et al., 1994), apoptosis (Stewart et al., 1997) and induction of cell cycle G2/M arrest (He et al., 1995; Re et al., 1995; Zhao et al., 1996).<br><br> Interactions between Vpr and host nucleoporins (importin) appear to facilitate the nuclear import of the PIC (Popov et al., 1998; Vodicka et al., 1998) while interactions between Vpr the adenine nucleotide transporter (ANT) protein at the inner mitochondrial membrane may contribute to release of apoptosis factors by promoting permeabilization of the mitochondrial outer membrane (Jacotot et al., 2000). <br> <br>Vpr induces cell cycle G2/M arrest by promoting hyperphosphorylation of Cdk1/Cdc2 (Re et al., 1995; Zhao et al., 1996). However, it is unclear which protein(s) Vpr interacts with to cause this effect. For recent reviews, see, (Li et al., 2005; Zhao, Bukrinsky, and Elder, 2005). Progression of cells from G2 phase of the cell cycle to mitosis is a tightly regulated cellular process that requires activation of the Cdk1/Cdc2 kinase, which determines onset of mitosis in all eukaryotic cells. The activity of Cdk1/Cdc2 is regulated in part by the phosphorylation status of tyrosine 15 (Tyr15) on Cdk1/Cdc2, which is phosphorylated by Wee1 kinase during late G2 and is rapidly dephosphorylated by the Cdc25 tyrosine phosphatase to trigger entry into mitosis. These Cdk1/Cdc2 regulators are the downstream targets of two well-characterized G2/M checkpoint pathways which prevent cells from entering mitosis when cellular DNA is damaged or when DNA replication is inhibited. It is clear that Vpr induces cell cycle G2/M arrest by promoting Tyr15 phosphorylation of Cdk1/Cdc2 both in human and fission yeast cells (Elder et al., 2000; Re et al., 1995; Zhao et al., 1996), which modulates host cell cycle machinery to benefit viral survival or replication. Although some aspects of Vpr-induced G2/M arrest resembles induction of host cellular checkpoints, increasing evidence suggests that Vpr induces cell cycle G2 arrest through a mechanism that is to some extent different from the classic G2/M checkpoints. One the unique features distinguishing Vpr-induced G2 arrest from the classic checkpoints is the role of phosphatase 2A (PP2A) in Vpr-induced G2 arrest (Elder, Benko, and Zhao, 2002; Elder et al., 2001; Masuda et al., 2000). Interestingly, PP2A is targeted by a number of other viral proteins including SV40 small T antigen, polyomavirus T antigen, HTLV Tax and adenovirus E4orf4. Thus an in-depth understanding of the molecular mechanisms underlying Vpr-induced G2 arrest will provide additional insights into the basic biology of cell cycle G2/M regulation and into the biological significance of this effect during host-pathogen interactions.
R-HSA-880009	Interconversion of 2-oxoglutarate and 2-hydroxyglutarate	The two stereoisomers of 2-hydroxyglutarate are normally converted to 2-oxoglutarate in the mitochondrial matrix, and can then be metabolized by the citric acid cycle. The physiological sources of 2-hydroxyglutarate have not been established although plausible hypotheses are that it is generated by lysine breakdown or as a byproduct of delta-aminolevulinate metabolism. The stereoisomers are oxidized to 2-oxoglutarate in FAD-dependent reactions catalyzed by the enzymes D2HGDH (specific for R(-)-2-hydroxyglutarate) and L2HGDH (specific for S(-)-2-hydroxyglutarate). An inherited deficiency in either enzyme is associated with accumulation of 2-hydroxyglutarate and variable neurological symptoms. R(-)-2-hydroxyglutarate also reacts reversibly with succinate semialdehyde to form 4-hydroxybutyrate and 2-oxoglutarate, catalyzed by ADHFE1. No deficiencies of this enzyme have been found in patients with elevated 2-hydroxyglutarate levels (Struys 2006).
R-HSA-351200	Interconversion of polyamines	The reactions catalyzed by aminopropyl-transferases annotated above are generally irreversible. But spermine and spermidine can be recycled respectively into spermidine and putrescine. These events require the formation of N-acetylated intermediates, N1-acetylspermine and N1-acetylspermidine catalyzed by a cytosolic acetyl-CoA:spermidine/spermine N1-acetyl-tranferase (SSAT) enzyme.<br>Subsequently, polyamine-oxidase (PAO), a FAD enzyme present in the peroxysomes, yields a polyamine with release of an aldehyde (3-acetamindopropanal) and H2O2.<br>In addition, SMOX, a FAD-dependent, polyamine oxidase (PAOh1/SMO) that can efficiently use spermine as a substrate and is involved in interconversion reactions.
R-HSA-909733	Interferon alpha/beta signaling	Type I interferons (IFNs) are composed of various genes including IFN alpha (IFNA), beta (IFNB), omega, epsilon, and kappa. In humans the IFNA genes are composed of more than 13 subfamily genes, whereas there is only one IFNB gene. The large family of IFNA/B proteins all bind to a single receptor which is composed of two distinct chains: IFNAR1 and IFNAR2. The IFNA/B stimulation of the IFNA receptor complex leads to the formation of two transcriptional activator complexes: IFNA-activated-factor (AAF), which is a homodimer of STAT1 and IFN-stimulated gene factor 3 (ISGF3), which comprises STAT1, STAT2 and a member of the IRF family, IRF9/P48. AAF mediates activation of the IRF-1 gene by binding to GAS (IFNG-activated site), whereas ISGF3 activates several IFN-inducible genes including IRF3 and IRF7.
R-HSA-877300	Interferon gamma signaling	Interferon-gamma (IFN-gamma) belongs to the type II interferon family and is secreted by activated immune cells-primarily T and NK cells, but also B-cells and APC. INFG exerts its effect on cells by interacting with the specific IFN-gamma receptor (IFNGR). IFNGR consists of two chains, namely IFNGR1 (also known as the IFNGR alpha chain) and IFNGR2 (also known as the IFNGR beta chain). IFNGR1 is the ligand binding receptor and is required but not sufficient for signal transduction, whereas IFNGR2 do not bind IFNG independently but mainly plays a role in IFNG signaling and is generally the limiting factor in IFNG responsiveness. Both IFNGR chains lack intrinsic kinase/phosphatase activity and thus rely on other signaling proteins like Janus-activated kinase 1 (JAK1), JAK2 and Signal transducer and activator of transcription 1 (STAT-1) for signal transduction. IFNGR complex in its resting state is a preformed tetramer and upon IFNG association undergoes a conformational change. This conformational change induces the phosphorylation and activation of JAK1, JAK2, and STAT1 which in turn induces genes containing the gamma-interferon activation sequence (GAS) in the promoter.
R-HSA-913531	Interferon Signaling	Interferons (IFNs) are cytokines that play a central role in initiating immune responses, especially antiviral and antitumor effects. There are three types of IFNs:Type I (IFN-alpha, -beta and others, such as omega, epsilon, and kappa), Type II (IFN-gamma) and Type III (IFN-lamda). In this module we are mainly focusing on type I IFNs alpha and beta and type II IFN-gamma. Both type I and type II IFNs exert their actions through cognate receptor complexes, IFNAR and IFNGR respectively, present on cell surface membranes. Type I IFNs are broadly expressed heterodimeric receptors composed of the IFNAR1 and IFNAR2 subunits, while the type II IFN receptor consists of IFNGR1 and IFNGR2. Type III interferon lambda has three members: lamda1 (IL-29), lambda2 (IL-28A), and lambda3 (IL-28B) respectively. IFN-lambda signaling is initiated through unique heterodimeric receptor composed of IFN-LR1/IF-28Ralpha and IL10R2 chains. <br>Type I IFNs typically recruit JAK1 and TYK2 proteins to transduce their signals to STAT1 and 2; in combination with IRF9 (IFN-regulatory factor 9), these proteins form the heterotrimeric complex ISGF3. In nucleus ISGF3 binds to IFN-stimulated response elements (ISRE) to promote gene induction. <br>Type II IFNs in turn rely upon the activation of JAKs 1 and 2 and STAT1. Once activated, STAT1 dimerizes to form the transcriptional regulator GAF (IFNG activated factor) and this binds to the IFNG activated sequence (GAS) elements and initiate the transcription of IFNG-responsive genes. <br>Like type I IFNs, IFN-lambda recruits TYK2 and JAK1 kinases and then promote the phosphorylation of STAT1/2, and induce the ISRE3 complex formation.
R-HSA-912526	Interleukin receptor SHC signaling	Phosphorylation of Shc at three tyrosine residues, 239, 240 (Gotoh et al. 1996) and 317 (Salcini et al. 1994) involves unidentified tyrosine kinases presumed to be part of the activated receptor complex. These phosphorylated tyrosines subsequently bind SH2 signaling proteins such as Grb2, Gab2 and SHIP that are involved in the regulation of different signaling pathways. Grb2 can associate with the guanosine diphosphate-guanosine triphosphate exchange factor Sos1, leading to Ras activation and regulation of cell proliferation. Downstream signals are mediated via the Raf-MEK-Erk pathway.Grb2 can also associate through Gab2 with PI3K and with SHIP.<br><br>Figure reproduced from Gu, H. et al. 2000. Mol. Cell. Biol. 20(19):7109-7120<br>Copyright American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.
R-HSA-448706	Interleukin-1 processing	The IL-1 family of cytokines that interact with the Type 1 IL-1R include IL-1 Alpha (IL1A), IL-1 Beta (IL1B) and the IL-1 receptor antagonist protein (IL1RAP). IL1RAP is synthesized with a signal peptide and secreted as a mature protein via the classical secretory pathway. IL1A and IL1B are synthesised as cytoplasmic precursors (pro-IL1A and pro-IL1B) in activated cells. They have no signal sequence, precluding secretion via the classical ER-Golgi route (Rubartelli et al. 1990). Processing of pro-IL1B to the active form requires caspase-1 (Thornberry et al. 1992), which is itself activated by a molecular scaffold termed the inflammasome (Martinon et al. 2002). Processing and release of IL1B are thought to be closely linked, because mature IL1B is only seen inside inflammatory cells just prior to release (Brough et al. 2003). It has been reported that in monocytes a fraction of cellular IL1B is released by the regulated secretion of late endosomes and early lysosomes, and that this may represent a cellular compartment where caspase-1 processing of pro-IL1B takes place (Andrei et al. 1999). Shedding of microvesicles from the plasma membrane has also been proposed as a mechanism of secretion (MacKenzie et al. 2001). These proposals superceded previous models in which non-specific release due to cell lysis and passage through a plasma membrane pore were considered. However, there is evidence in the literature that supports all of these mechanisms and there is still controversy over how IL1B exits from cells (Brough & Rothwell 2007). A calpain-like potease has been reported to be important for the processing of pro-IL1A, but much less is known about how IL1A is released from cells and what specific roles it plays in biology.
R-HSA-446652	Interleukin-1 signaling	Interleukin 1 (IL1) signals via Interleukin 1 receptor 1 (IL1R1), the only signaling-capable IL1 receptor. This is a single chain type 1 transmembrane protein comprising an extracellular ligand binding domain and an intracellular region called the Toll/Interleukin-1 receptor (TIR) domain that is structurally conserved and shared by other members of the two families of receptors (Xu et al. 2000). This domain is also shared by the downstream adapter molecule MyD88. IL1 binding to IL1R1 leads to the recruitment of a second receptor chain termed the IL1 receptor accessory protein (IL1RAP or IL1RAcP) enabling the formation of a high-affinity ligand-receptor complex that is capable of signal transduction. Intracellular signaling is initiated by the recruitment of MyD88 to the IL-1R1/IL1RAP complex. IL1RAP is only recruited to IL1R1 when IL1 is present; it is believed that a TIR domain signaling complex is formed between the receptor and the adapter TIR domains. The recruitment of MyD88 leads to the recruitment of Interleukin-1 receptor-associated kinase (IRAK)-1 and -4, probably via their death domains. IRAK4 then activates IRAK1, allowing IRAK1 to autophosphorylate. Both IRAK1 and IRAK4 then dissociate from MyD88 (Brikos et al. 2007) which remains stably complexed with IL-1R1 and IL1RAP. They in turn interact with Tumor Necrosis Factor Receptor (TNFR)-Associated Factor 6 (TRAF6), which is an E3 ubiquitin ligase (Deng et al. 2000). TRAF6 is then thought to auto-ubiquinate, attaching K63-polyubiquitin to itself with the assistance of the E2 conjugating complex Ubc13/Uev1a. K63-pUb-TRAF6 recruits Transforming Growth Factor (TGF) beta-activated protein kinase 1 (TAK1) in a complex with TAK1-binding protein 2 (TAB2) and TAB3, which both contain nuclear zinc finger motifs that interact with K63-polyubiquitin chains (Ninomiya-Tsuji et al. 1999). This activates TAK1, which then activates inhibitor of NF-kappaB (IkappaB) kinase 2 (IKK2 or IKKB) within the IKK complex, the kinase responsible for phosphorylation of IkappaB. The IKK complex also contains the scaffold protein NF-kappa B essential modulator (NEMO). TAK1 also couples to the upstream kinases for p38 and c-jun N-terminal kinase (JNK). IRAK1 undergoes K63-linked polyubiquination; Pellino E3 ligases are important in this process. (Butler et al. 2007; Ordureau et al. 2008). The activity of these proteins is greatly enhanced by IRAK phosphorylation (Schauvliege et al. 2006), leading to K63-linked polyubiquitination of IRAK1. This recruits NEMO to IRAK1, with NEMO binding to polyubiquitin (Conze et al. 2008).<br><br>TAK1 activates IKKB (and IKK), resulting in phosphorylation of the inhibitory IkB proteins and enabling translocation of NFkB to the nucleus; IKKB also phosphorylates NFkB p105, leading to its degradation and the subsequent release of active TPL2 that triggers the extracellular-signal regulated kinase (ERK)1/2 MAPK cascade. TAK1 can also trigger the p38 and JNK MAPK pathways via activating the upstream MKKs3, 4 and 6. The MAPK pathways activate a number of downstream kinases and transcription factors that co-operate with NFkB to induce the expression of a range of TLR/IL-1R-responsive genes. There are reports suggesting that IL1 stimulation increases nuclear localization of IRAK1 (Bol et al. 2000) and that nuclear IRAK1 binds to the promoter of NFkB-regulated gene and IkBa, enhancing binding of the NFkB p65 subunit to NFkB responsive elements within the IkBa promoter. IRAK1 is required for IL1-induced Ser-10 phosphorylation of histone H3 in vivo (Liu et al. 2008). However, details of this aspect of IRAK1 signaling mechanisms remain unclear.
R-HSA-451927	Interleukin-2 signaling	Interleukin-2 (IL-2) is a cytokine that is produced by T cells in response to antigen stimulation. Originally, IL-2 was discovered because of its potent growth factor activity on activated T cells in vitro and was therefore named 'T cell growth factor' (TCGF). However, the generation of IL-2- and IL-2 receptor-deficient mice revealed that IL-2 also plays a regulatory role in the immune system by suppressing autoimmune responses. Two main mechanisms have been identified that explain this suppressive function: (1) IL-2 sensitizes activated T cells for activation-induced cell death (AICD) and (2) IL-2 is critical for the survival and function of regulatory T cells (Tregs), which possess potent immunosuppressive properties.<br><br>IL-2 signaling occurs when IL-2 binds to the heterotrimeric high-affinity IL-2 receptor (IL-2R), which consists of alpha, beta and gamma chains. The IL-2R was identified in 1981 via radiolabeled ligand binding (Robb et al. 1981). The IL-2R alpha chain was identified in 1982 (Leonard et al.), the beta chain in 1986/7 (Sharon et al. 1986, Teshigawara et al. 1987) and the IL-2R gamma chain in 1992 (Takeshita et al.). The high affinity of IL-2 binding to the IL-2R is created by a very rapid association rate to the IL-2R alpha chain, combined with a much slower dissociation rate contributed by the combination of the IL-2R beta and gamma chains (Wang & Smith 1987). After antigen stimulation, T cells upregulate the high-affinity IL-2R alpha chain; IL-2R alpha captures IL-2 and this complex then associates with the constitutively expressed IL-2R beta and gamma chains. The IL-2R gamma chain is shared by several other members of the cytokine receptor superfamily including IL-4, IL-7, IL-9, IL-15 and IL-21 receptors, and consequently is often referred to as the Common gamma chain (Gamma-c). The tyrosine kinases Jak1 and Jak3, which are constitutively associated with IL-2R beta and Gamma-c respectively, are activated resulting in phosphorylation of three critical tyrosine residues in the IL-2R beta cytoplasmic tail. These phosphorylated residues enable recruitment of the adaptor molecule Shc, activating the MAPK and PI3K pathways, and the transcription factor STAT5. After phosphorylation, STAT5 forms dimers that translocate to the nucleus and initiate gene expression. While STAT5 activation is critical for IL-2 function in most cell types, the contribution of the PI3K/Akt pathway differs between distinct T cell subsets. In Tregs for example, PI3K/Akt is not involved in IL-2 signaling and this may explain some of the different functional outcomes of IL-2 signaling in Tregs vs. effector T cells. 
R-HSA-512988	Interleukin-3, 5 and GM-CSF signaling	The Interleukin-3 (IL-3), IL-5 and Granulocyte-macrophage colony stimulating factor (GM-CSF) receptors form a family of heterodimeric receptors that have specific alpha chains but share a common beta subunit, often referred to as the common beta (Bc). Both subunits contain extracellular conserved motifs typical of the cytokine receptor superfamily. The cytoplasmic domains have limited similarity with other cytokine receptors and lack detectable catalytic domains such as tyrosine kinase domains.<br><br> IL-3 is a 20-26 kDa product of CD4+ T cells that acts on the most immature marrow progenitors. IL-3 is capable of inducing the growth and differentiation of multi-potential hematopoietic stem cells, neutrophils, eosinophils, megakaryocytes, macrophages, lymphoid and erythroid cells. IL-3 has been used to support the proliferation of murine cell lines with properties of multi-potential progenitors, immature myeloid as well as T and pre-B lymphoid cells (Miyajima et al. 1992). IL-5 is a hematopoietic growth factor responsible for the maturation and differentiation of eosinophils. It was originally defined as a T-cell-derived cytokine that triggers activated B cells for terminal differentiation into antibody-secreting plasma cells. It also promotes the generation of cytotoxic T-cells from thymocytes. IL-5 induces the expression of IL-2 receptors (Kouro & Takatsu 2009). GM-CSF is produced by cells (T-lymphocytes, tissue macrophages, endothelial cells, mast cells) found at sites of inflammatory responses. It stimulates the growth and development of progenitors of granulocytes and macrophages, and the production and maturation of dendritic cells. It stimulates myeloblast and monoblast differentiation, synergises with Epo in the proliferation of erythroid and megakaryocytic progenitor cells, acts as an autocrine mediator of growth for some types of acute myeloid leukemia, is a strong chemoattractant for neutrophils and eosinophils. It enhances the activity of neutrophils and macrophages. Under steady-state conditions GM-CSF is not essential for the production of myeloid cells, but it is required for the proper development of alveolar macrophages, otherwise, pulmonary alvelolar proteinosis (PAP) develops. A growing body of evidence suggests that GM-CSF plays a key role in emergency hematopoiesis (predominantly myelopoiesis) in response to infection, including the production of granulocytes and macrophages in the bone marrow and their maintenance, survival, and functional activation at sites of injury or insult (Hercus et al. 2009).<br><br> All three receptors have alpha chains that bind their specific ligands with low affinity (de Groot et al. 1998). Bc then associates with the alpha chain forming a high affinity receptor (Geijsen et al. 2001), though the in vivo receptor is likely be a higher order multimer as recently demonstrated for the GM-CSF receptor (Hansen et al. 2008).<br><br> The receptor chains lack intrinsic kinase activity, instead they interact with and activate signaling kinases, notably Janus Kinase 2 (JAK2). These phosphorylate the common beta subunit, allowing recruitment of signaling molecules such as Shc, the phosphatidylinositol 3-kinases (PI3Ks), and the Signal Transducers and Activators of Transcription (STATs). The cytoplasmic domain of Bc has two distinct functional domains: the membrane proximal region mediates the induction of proliferation-associated genes such as c-myc, pim-1 and oncostatin M. This region binds multiple signal-transducing proteins including JAK2 (Quelle et al. 1994), STATs, c-Src and PI3 kinase (Rao and Mufson, 1995). The membrane distal domain is required for cytokine-induced growth inhibition and is necessary for the viability of hematopoietic cells (Inhorn et al. 1995). This region interacts with signal-transducing proteins such as Shc (Inhorn et al. 1995) and SHP and mediates the transcriptional activation of c-fos, c-jun, c-Raf and p70S6K (Reddy et al. 2000).<br><br><br><br>Figure reproduced by permission from Macmillan Publishers Ltd: Leukemia, WL Blalock et al. 13:1109-1166, copyright 1999. Note that residue numbering in this diagram refers to the mature Common beta chain with signal peptide removed.
R-HSA-1059683	Interleukin-6 signaling	Interleukin-6 (IL-6) is a pleiotropic cytokine with roles in processes including immune regulation, hematopoiesis, inflammation, oncogenesis, metabolic control and sleep. It is the founding member of a family of IL-6-related cytokines such as IL-11, IL-27 leukemia inhibitory factor (LIF), cilliary neurotrophic factor (CNTF) and oncostatin M. <br><br>The IL-6 receptor (IL6R) consists of an alpha subunit that specifically binds IL-6 and a beta subunit, IL6RB or gp130, which is the signaling component of all the receptors for cytokines related to IL-6. IL6R alpha exists in transmembrane and soluble forms. The transmembrane form is mainly expressed by hepatocytes, neutrophils, monocytes/macrophages, and some lymphocytes. Soluble forms of IL6R (sIL6R) are also expressed by these cells. Two major mechanisms for the production of sIL6R have been proposed. Alternative splicing generates a transcript lacking the transmembrane domain by using splicing donor and acceptor sites that flank the transmembrane domain coding region. This also introduces a frameshift leading to the incorporation of 10 additional amino acids at the C terminus of sIL6R.A second mechanism for the generation of sIL6R is the proteolytic cleavage or 'shedding' of membrane-bound IL-6R. Two proteases ADAM10 and ADAM17 are thought to contribute to this (Briso et al. 2008). sIL6R can bind IL6 and stimulate cells that express gp130 but not IL6R alpha, a process that is termed trans-signaling. This explains why many cells, including hematopoietic progenitor cells, neuronal cells, endothelial cells, smooth muscle cells, and embryonic stem cells, do not respond to IL6 alone, but show a remarkable response to IL6/sIL6R. It is clear that the trans-signaling pathway is responsible for the pro-inflammatory activities of IL-6 whereas the membrane bound receptor governs regenerative and anti-inflammatory IL-6 activities<br><br>IL6R signal transduction is mediated by two pathways:the JAK-STAT (Janus family tyrosine kinase-signal transducer and activator of transcription) pathway and the Ras-MAPK (mitogen-activated protein kinase) pathway. Negative regulators of IL-6 signaling include SOCS (suppressor of cytokine signals) and SHP2. Within the last few years different antibodies have been developed to inhibit IL-6 activity, and the first such antibodies have been introduced into the clinic for the treatment of inflammatory diseases (Kopf et al. 2010). 
R-HSA-1266695	Interleukin-7 signaling	Interleukin-7 (IL7) is produced primarily by T zone fibroblastic reticular cells found in lymphoid organs, and also expressed by non-hematopoietic stromal cells present in other tissues including the skin, intestine and liver. It is an essential survival factor for lymphocytes, playing a key anti-apoptotic role in T-cell development, as well as mediating peripheral T-cell maintenance and proliferation. This dual function is reflected in a dose-response relationship that distinguishes the survival function from the proliferative activity; low doses of IL7 (<1 ng/ml) sustain only survival, higher doses (>1 ng/ml) promote survival and cell cycling (Kittipatarin et al. 2006, Swainson et al. 2007).<br><br>The IL7 receptor is a heterodimeric complex of the the common cytokine-receptor gamma chain (IL2RG, CD132, or Gc) and the IL7-receptor alpha chain (IL7R, IL7RA, CD127). Both chains are members of the type 1 cytokine family. Neither chain is unique to the IL7 receptor as IL7R is utilized by the receptor for thymic stromal lymphopoietin (TSLP) while IL2RG is shared with the receptors for IL2, IL4, IL9, IL15 and IL21. IL2RG consists of a single transmembrane region and a 240aa extracellular region that includes a fibronectin type III (FNIII) domain thought to be involved in receptor complex formation. It is expressed on most lymphocyte populations. Null mutations of IL2RG in humans cause X-linked severe combined immunodeficiency (X-SCID), which has a phenotype of severely reduced T-cell and natural killer (NK) cell populations, but normal numbers of B cells. In addition to reduced T- and NK-cell numbers, Il2rg knockout mice also have dramatically reduced B-cell populations suggesting that Il2rg is more critical for B-cell development in mice than in humans. Patients with severe combined immunodeficiency (SCID) phenotype due to IL7R mutations (see Puel & Leonard 2000), or a partial deficiency of IL7R (Roifman et al. 2000) have markedly reduced circulating T cells, but normal levels of peripheral blood B cells and NK cells, similar to the phenotype of IL2RG mutations, highlighting a requirement for IL7 in T cell lymphopoiesis. It has been suggested that IL7 is essential for murine, but not human B cell development, but recent studies indicate that IL7 is essential for human B cell production from adult bone marrow and that IL7-induced expansion of the progenitor B cell compartment is increasingly critical for human B cell production during later stages of development (Parrish et al. 2009).<br><br>IL7 has been shown to induce rapid and dose-dependent tyrosine phosphorylation of JAKs 1 and 3, and concomitantly tyrosine phosphorylation and DNA-binding activity of STAT5a/b (Foxwell et al. 1995). IL7R was shown to directly induce the activation of JAKs and STATs by van der Plas et al. (1996). Jak1 and Jak3 knockout mice displayed severely impaired thymic development, further supporting their importance in IL7 signaling (Rodig et al. 1998, Nosaka et al. 1995).<br><br>The role of STAT5 in IL7 signaling has been studied largely in mouse models. Tyr449 in the cytoplasmic domain of IL7RA is required for T-cell development in vivo and activation of JAK/STAT5 and PI3k/Akt pathways (Jiang et al. 2004, Pallard et al. 1999). T-cells from an IL7R Y449F knock-in mouse did not activate STAT5 (Osbourne et al. 2007), indicating that IL7 regulates STAT5 activity via this key tyrosine residue. STAT5 seems to enhance proliferation of multiple cell lineages in mouse models but it remains unclear whether STAT5 is required solely for survival signaling or also for the induction of proliferative activity (Kittipatarin & Khaled, 2007).<br><br>The model for IL7 receptor signaling is believed to resemble that of other Gc family cytokines, based on detailed studies of the IL2 receptor, where IL2RB binds constitutively to JAK1 while JAK3 is pre-associated uniquely with the IL2RG chain. Extending this model to IL7 suggests a similar series of events: IL7R constitutively associated with JAK1 binds IL7, the resulting trimer recruits IL2RG:JAK3, bringing JAK1 and JAK3 into proximity. The association of both chains of the IL7 receptor orients the cytoplasmic domains of the receptor chains so that their associated kinases (Janus and phosphatidylinositol 3-kinases) can phosphorylate sequence elements on the cytoplasmic domains (Jiang et al. 2005). JAKs have low intrinsic enzymatic activity, but after mutual phosphorylation acquire much higher activity, leading to phosphorylation of the critical Y449 site on IL7R. This site binds STAT5 and possibly other signaling adapters, they in turn become phosphorylated by JAK1 and/or JAK3. Phosphorylated STATs translocate to the nucleus and trigger the transcriptional events of their target genes.<br><br>The role of the PI3K/AKT pathway in IL7 signaling is controversial. It is a potential T-cell survival pathway because in many cell types PI3K signaling regulates diverse cellular functions such as cell cycle progression, transcription, and metabolism. The ERK/MAPK pathway does not appear to be involved in IL7 signaling (Crawley et al. 1996).<br><br>It is not clear how IL7 influences cell proliferation. In the absence of a proliferative signal such as IL7 or IL3, dependent lymphocytes arrest in the G0/G1 phase of the cell cycle. To exit this phase, cells typically activate specific G1 Cyclin-dependent kinases/cyclins and down regulate cell cycle inhibitors such as Cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor 1B (Cdkn1b or p27kip1). There is indirect evidence suggesting a possible role for IL7 stimulated activation of PI3K/AKT signaling, obtained from transformed cell lines and thymocytes, but not confirmed by observations using primary T-cells (Kittipatarin & Khaled, 2007). IL7 withdrawal results in G1/S cell cycle arrest and is correlated with loss of cdk2 activity (Geiselhart et al. 2001), both events which are known to be regulated by the dephosphorylating activity of Cdc25A. Expression of a p38 MAPK-resistant Cdc25A mutant in an IL-7-dependent T-cell line as well as in peripheral, primary T-cells was sufficient to sustain cell survival and promote cell cycling for several days in the absence of IL7 (Khaled et al. 2005). Cdkn1b is a member of the CIP/KIP family of cyclin-dependent cell cycle inhibitors (CKIs) that negatively regulates the G1/S transition. In IL7 dependent T-cells, the expression of Cdkn1b was sufficient to cause G1 arrest in the presence of IL7. Withdrawal of IL7 induced the upregulation of Cdkn1b and arrested cells in G1 while siRNA knockout of Cdkn1b enhanced cell cycle progression. However, adoptive transfer of Cdkn1b-deficient lymphocytes into IL7 deficient mice indicated that loss of Cdkn1b could only partially compensate for the IL7 signal needed by T-cells to expand in a lymphopenic environment (Li et al. 2006), so though Cdkn1b may be involved in negative regulation of the cell cycle through an effect on cdk2 activity, its absence is not sufficient to fully induce cell cycling under lymphopenic conditions.
R-HSA-5659898	Intestinal saccharidase deficiencies	Defects in in two enzymes required for intestinal digestion of dietary carbohydrate, lactase (LCT, a domain of lactase-phlorizin hydrolase protein) and sucrase-isomaltase (SI), are annotated here. The first affects nursing infants; the second affects individuals after weaning.<p>The disaccharide lactose is a major constituent of human breast milk. To be taken up from the gut in the nursing infant, this sugar must first be hydrolyzed by LCT present on the external face of enterocytes in microvilli of the small intestine. Mutations that disrupt LCT activity are associated with acute illness in newborn children as lactose fermentation by gut bacteria leads to severe diarrhea. The condition is effectively treated by feeding affected infants a lactose-free formula. This congenital disease is distinct from the down-regulation of LCT expression after weaning in many human populations that is associated with a milder form of lactose intolerance in adults (Jarvela et al. 2009).<p>The starch in a post-weaning diet is digested by amylases to di- and oligosaccharides that must be further digested to monosaccharides in order to be taken up from the lumen of the small intestine into endothelial cells of the intestinal brush border. If they are not digested, a process in which enterocyte-associated SI plays a central role, they remain in the gut lumen and are fermented by gut bacteria, leading to osmotic and fermentative diarrhea (Naim et al. 2012; Van Beers et al. 1995).
R-HSA-5620924	Intraflagellar transport	Intraflagellar transport (IFT) is a motor-based process that controls the anterograde and retrograde transport of large protein complexes, ciliary cargo and structural components along the ciliary axoneme (reviewed in Cole and Snell, 2009). IFT particles contain two multiprotein IFT subcomplexes, IFT A and IFT B, with ~6 and ~15 subunits, respectively. Linear arrays of IFT A and IFT B 'trains' assemble at the ciliary base along with the active plus-end directed kinesin-2 motors and the inactive dynein motors and traffic along the microtubules at a rate of ~2 micrometers per second. At the ciliary tip, the IFT trains disassemble, releasing cargo and motors, and smaller IFT trains are subsequently reassembled for retrograde traffic driven by the now active minus-end directed dynein-2 motors. Retrograde trains travel down the length of the axoneme at a rate of ~3 micrometers per second and are disassembled and recycled for further rounds of transport at the ciliary base (reviewed in Taschner et al, 2012; Bhogaraju et al, 2013; Ishikawa et al, 2011). Mutations in kinesin-2 motors or IFT B complex members tend to abrogate cilium formation, while mutations in dynein-2 motor or in IFT A complex members generally result in short, bulging cilia that abnormally accumulate IFT particles. These observations are consistent with a primary role for IFT B and IFT A complexes in anterograde and retrograde transport, respectively (see for instance, Huangfu et al, 2005; Follit et al, 2006; May et al, 2005; Tran et al, 2008; reviwed in Ishikawa et al, 2011). In addition to the IFT A and B complexes, the IFT particles may also contain the multi-protein BBSome complex, which displays typical IFT-like movement along the ciliary axoneme and which is required for cilium biogenesis and delivery and transport of some ciliary cargo (Blaque et al, 2004; Nachury et al, 2007; Ou et al, 2005; Ou et al, 2007; reviewed in Sung and Leroux, 2013; Bhorgaraju et al, 2013).
R-HSA-109606	Intrinsic Pathway for Apoptosis	The intrinsic (Bcl-2 inhibitable or mitochondrial) pathway of apoptosis functions in response to various types of intracellular stress including growth factor withdrawal, DNA damage, unfolding stresses in the endoplasmic reticulum and death receptor stimulation. Following the reception of stress signals, proapoptotic BCL-2 family proteins are activated and subsequently interact with and inactivate antiapoptotic BCL-2 proteins. This interaction leads to the destabilization of the mitochondrial membrane and release of apoptotic factors. These factors induce the caspase proteolytic cascade, chromatin condensation, and DNA fragmentation, ultimately leading to cell death. The key players in the Intrinsic pathway are the Bcl-2 family of proteins that are critical death regulators residing immediately upstream of mitochondria. The Bcl-2 family consists of both anti- and proapoptotic members that possess conserved alpha-helices with sequence conservation clustered in BCL-2 Homology (BH) domains. Proapoptotic members are organized as follows: <p> 1. "Multidomain" BAX family proteins such as BAX, BAK etc. that display sequence conservation in their BH1-3 regions. These proteins act downstream in mitochondrial disruption. <p> 2. "BH3-only" proteins such as BID,BAD, NOXA, PUMA,BIM, and BMF have only the short BH3 motif. These act upstream in the pathway, detecting developmental death cues or intracellular damage. Anti-apoptotic members like Bcl-2, Bcl-XL and their relatives exhibit homology in all segments BH1-4. One of the critical functions of BCL-2/BCL-XL proteins is to maintain the integrity of the mitochondrial outer membrane.
R-HSA-140837	Intrinsic Pathway of Fibrin Clot Formation	The intrinsic pathway of blood clotting connects interactions among kininogen (high molecular weight kininogen, HK), prekallikrein (PK), and factor XII to the activation of clotting factor X by a series of reactions that is independent of the extrinsic pathway and that is not subject to inhibition by TFPI. It is thus essential for the prolongation of the clotting cascade: while the reactions of the extrinsic pathway appear to be sufficient to initiate clot formation, those of the intrinsic pathway are required to maintain it (Broze 1995; Davie et al. 1991; Monroe et al. 2002). The intrinsic pathway can be divided into three parts: 1) reactions involving interactions of kininogen, prekallikrein, and factor XII, leading to the activation of factor XII, 2) reactions involving factor XI, factor IX, factor VIII, and von Willebrand factor (vWF) leading to the activation of factors VIII and IX, and 3) reactions that inactivate factor XIIa and kallikrein.<p>Kininogen, prekallikrein, and factor XII were first identified as proteins needed for the rapid formation of clots when whole blood is exposed to negatively charged surfaces in vitro. Studies in vitro have identified several possible sets of interactions, in which small quantities of one or more of these proteins 'autoactivate' and then catalyze the formation of larger quantities of activated factors. Recent work, however, suggests that these factors form complexes on endothelial cell surfaces mediated by C1q binding protein (C1q bp), that the first activation event is the cleavage of prekallikrein by prolylcarboxypeptidase, and that the resulting kallikrein catalyzes the activation of factor XII (Schmaier 2004).<p>The second group of events, occurs in vivo on the surfaces of activated platelets (although most biochemical characterization of the reactions was originally done with purified proteins in solution). Factor XI binds to the platelet glycoprotein (GP) Ib:IX:V complex, where it can be activated by cleavage either by thrombin (generated by reactions of the common pathway) or by activated factor XII (generated in the first part of the intrinsic pathway). Activated factor XI in turn catalyzes the activation of factor IX. Simultaneously, factor VIII, complexed with vWF, is cleaved by thrombin, activating it and causing its release from vWF. Activated factors VIII and IX form a complex on the platelet surface that very efficiently converts factor X to activated factor X. (Activated factors X and V then form a complex that efficiently activates thrombin.)<p>While these two groups of events can be viewed as forming a single functional pathway (e.g., Davie et al. 1991), human clinical genetic data cast doubt on this view. Individuals deficient in kininogen, prekallikrein, or factor XII proteins exhibit normal blood clot formation in vivo. In contrast, deficiencies of factor XI can be associated with failure of blood clotting under some conditions, and deficiencies of vWF, factor VIII, or factor IX cause severe abnormalities - von Willebrand disease, hemophilia A, and hemophilia B, respectively. These data suggest that while the second group of events is essential for normal clot formation in vivo, the first group has a different function (e.g., Schmaier 2004).<p>Finally, reactions neutralize proteins activated in the first part of the intrinsic pathway. Kallikrein forms stable complexes with either C1 inhibitor (C1Inh) or with alpha2-macroglobulin, and factor XIIa forms stable complexes with C1Inh. The relevance of these neutralization events to the regulation of blood clotting is unclear, however. The physiological abnormalities observed in individuals who lack C1Inh appear to be due entirely to abnormalities of complement activation; blood clotting appears to proceed normally. This observation is consistent with the hypothesis, above, that factor XIIa plays a limited role in normal blood clotting under physiological conditions.<p>These events are outlined in the drawing: black arrows connect the substrates (inputs) and products (outputs) of individual reactions; blue lines connect activated enzymes to the reactions they catalyze.
R-HSA-1296065	Inwardly rectifying K+ channels	Inwardly rectifying K+ channels (Kir channels) show an inward rather than outward (like the voltage gated K+ channels) flow of K+ thereby contributing to maintenance of resting membrane potential and regulation of action potential in excitable tissue. Kir channels are found in a variety of cell types such as cardiac myocytes, neurons, blood cells, osteoblasts, glial cells, epithelial cells, and oocytes. Kir channels can be functionally divided into ATP sensitive K+ channels (Kir 6.1 and Kir 6.2), classical kir channels (Kir 2.1, 2.2, 2.3, 2.4, 5.1) G protein gated K+ channels (Kir 3.1, 3.2, 3.3, 3.4) and K+ transport channels (Kir1.1, 7.1, 4.2, 4.1).
R-HSA-983712	Ion channel transport	Ion channels mediate the flow of ions across the plasma membrane of cells. They are integral membrane proteins, typically a multimer of proteins, which, when arranged in the membrane, create a pore for the flow of ions. There are different types of ion channels. P-type ATPases undergo conformational changes to translocate ions. Ligand-gated ion channels operate like a gate, opened or closed by a chemical signal. Voltage-gated ion channels are activated by changes in electrical potential difference at the membrane (Purves, 2001; Kuhlbrandt, 2004).
R-HSA-936837	Ion transport by P-type ATPases	The P-type ATPases (E1-E2 ATPases) are a large group of evolutionarily related ion pumps that are found in bacteria, archaea and eukaryotes. They are referred to as P-type ATPases because they catalyze auto-phosphorylation of a key conserved aspartate residue within the pump. They all appear to interconvert between at least two different conformations, E1 and E2. Most members of this transporter family pump a large variety of cations (Kuhlbrandt W, 2004).
R-HSA-451306	Ionotropic activity of Kainate Receptors	Kainate receptors are either Ca2+ permeable or impermeable depending on the composition of the receptor and the editing status of subunits GluR5 and GluR6 (GRIK1 and 2).
R-HSA-1855196	IP3 and IP4 transport between cytosol and nucleus	Inositol trisphosphate (IP3) and tetrakisphosphate (IP4) molecules are exported from the cytosol to the nucleus (Dewaste et al. 2003, Nalaskowski et al. 2002). It is unknown whether this occurs by diffusion or is mediated by a transporter.
R-HSA-1855229	IP6 and IP7 transport between cytosol and nucleus	The inositol phosphates IP6 and IP7 are exported from the cytosol to the nucleus (Saiardi et al. 2001, Mulugu et al. 2007). The molecular details of these transport processes remain uncertain.
R-HSA-1855184	IPs transport between cytosol and ER lumen	Inositol phosphates IP4, IP5, and IP6 are exported from the cytosol to the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) lumen (Caffrey et al. 1999, Chi et al. 1999). The molecular details of these transport processes remain uncertain.
R-HSA-1855215	IPs transport between ER lumen and cytosol	Inositol phosphates IP3 and IP5 are imported into the cytosol from the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) lumen (Caffrey et al. 1999, Chi et al. 1999, Nalaskowski et al. 2002, Ho et al. 2002, Brehm et al. 2007). The molecular details of these transport processes remain uncertain.
R-HSA-1855156	IPs transport between ER lumen and nucleus	Inositol phosphates IP4 and IP5 are exported from the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) lumen to the nucleus (Caffrey et al. 1999, Chi et al. 1999, Nalaskowski et al. 2002, Verbsky et al. 2002, Brehm et al. 2007, Choi et al. 2007). The molecular details of these transport processes remain uncertain.
R-HSA-1855170	IPs transport between nucleus and cytosol	Inositol phosphates (IPs) synthesised in the nucleus are imported into the cytosol from the nucleus. The molecular details of these transport processes remain uncertain (Nalaskowski et al. 2002; Ho et al. 2002, Brehm et al. 2007, Saiardi et al. 2001, Saiardi et al. 2000, Fridy et al. 2007, Leslie et al. 2002).
R-HSA-1855192	IPs transport between nucleus and ER lumen	Inositol phosphate IP6 is imported to the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) lumen from the nucleus (Caffrey et al. 1999). The molecular details of these transport processes remain uncertain.
R-HSA-937039	IRAK1 recruits IKK complex	The role of IRAK1 kinase activity in the activation of NF-kappa-B by IL-1/TLR is still uncertain. It has been shown that a kinase-dead IRAK1 mutants can still activate NF-kappa-B. Furthermore, stimulation of IRAK1-deficient I1A 293 cells with LMP1 (latent membrane protein 1- a known viral activator of NF-kappa-B) leads to TRAF6 polyubiquitination and IKKbeta activation [Song et al 2006]. On the other hand, IRAK1 enhances p65 Ser536 phosphorylation [Song et al 2006] and p65 binding to the promoter of NF-kappa-B dependent target genes [Liu G et al 2008].<p> IRAK1 has also been shown to be itself Lys63-polyubiquitinated (probably by Pellino proteins, which have E3 ligase activity). Mutation of the ubiquitination sites on IRAK1 prevented interaction with the NEMO subunit of IKK complex and subsequent IL-1/TLR-induced NF-kappa-B activation [Conze et al 2008]. These data suggest that kinase activity of IRAK1 is not essential for its ability to activate NF-kappa-B, while its Lys63-polyubuquitination allows IRAK1 to bind NEMO thus facilitating association of TRAF6 and TAK1 complex with IKK complex followed by induction of NF-kappa-B. </p><p>Upon IL-1/TLR stimulation IRAK1 protein can undergo covalent modifications including phosphorylation [Kollewe et al 2004], ubiquitination [Conze DB et al 2008] and sumoylation [Huang et al 2004]. Depending upon the nature of its modification, IRAK1 may perform distinct functions including activation of IRF5/7 [Uematsu et al 2005, Schoenemeyer et al 2005], NF-kappa-B [Song et al 2006], and Stat1/3 [Huang et al 2004, Nguyen et al 2003].
R-HSA-975144	IRAK1 recruits IKK complex upon TLR7/8 or 9 stimulation	The role of IRAK1 kinase activity in the activation of NF-kappa-B by IL-1/TLR is still uncertain. It has been shown that a kinase-dead IRAK1 mutants can still activate NF-kappa-B. Furthermore, stimulation of IRAK1-deficient I1A 293 cells with LMP1 (latent membrane protein 1- a known viral activator of NF-kappa-B) leads to TRAF6 polyubiquitination and IKKbeta activation [Song et al 2006]. On the other hand, IRAK1 enhances p65 Ser536 phosphorylation [Song et al 2006] and p65 binding to the promoter of NF-kappa-B dependent target genes [Liu G et al 2008].<p> IRAK1 has also been shown to be itself Lys63-polyubiquitinated (probably by Pellino proteins, which have E3 ligase activity). Mutation of the ubiquitination sites on IRAK1 prevented interaction with the NEMO subunit of IKK complex and subsequent IL-1/TLR-induced NF-kappa-B activation [Conze et al 2008]. These data suggest that kinase activity of IRAK1 is not essential for its ability to activate NF-kappa-B, while its Lys63-polyubuquitination allows IRAK1 to bind NEMO thus facilitating association of TRAF6 and TAK1 complex with IKK complex followed by induction of NF-kappa-B. </p><p>Upon IL-1/TLR stimulation IRAK1 protein can undergo covalent modifications including phosphorylation [Kollewe et al 2004], ubiquitination [Conze DB et al 2008] and sumoylation [Huang et al 2004]. Depending upon the nature of its modification, IRAK1 may perform distinct functions including activation of IRF5/7 [Uematsu et al 2005, Schoenemeyer et al 2005], NF-kappa-B [Song et al 2006], and Stat1/3 [Huang et al 2004, Nguyen et al 2003].
R-HSA-937042	IRAK2 mediated activation of TAK1 complex	Although IRAK-1 was originally thought to be a key mediator of TRAF6 activation in the IL1R/TLR signaling (Dong W et al. 2006), recent studies showed that IRAK-2, but not IRAK-1, led to TRAF6 polyubiquitination (Keating SE et al 2007). IRAK-2 loss-of-function mutants, with mutated TRAF6-binding motifs, could no longer activate NF-kB and could no longer stimulate TRAF-6 ubiquitination (Keating SE et al 2007). Furthermore, the proxyvirus protein A52 - an inhibitor of all IL-1R/TLR pathways to NF-kB activation, was found to interact with both IRAK-2 and TRAF6, but not IRAK-1. Further work showed that A52 inhibits IRAK-2 functions, whereas association with TRAF6 results in A52-induced MAPK activation. The strong inhibition effect of A52 was also observed on the TLR3-NFkB axis and this observation led to the discovery that IRAK-2 is recruited to TLR3 to activate NF-kB (Keating SE et al 2007). Thus, A52 possibly inhibits MyD88-independent TLR3 pathways to NF-kB via targeting IRAK-2 as it does for other IL-1R/TLR pathways, although it remains unclear how IRAK-2 is involved in TLR3 signaling.<p>IRAK-2 was shown to have two TRAF6 binding motifs that are responsible for initiating TRAF6 signaling transduction (Ye H et al 2002).
R-HSA-975163	IRAK2 mediated activation of TAK1 complex upon TLR7/8 or 9 stimulation	Although IRAK-1 was originally thought to be a key mediator of TRAF6 activation in the IL1R/TLR signaling (Dong W et al. 2006), recent studies showed that IRAK-2, but not IRAK-1, led to TRAF6 polyubiquitination (Keating SE et al 2007). IRAK-2 loss-of-function mutants, with mutated TRAF6-binding motifs, could no longer activate NF-kB and could no longer stimulate TRAF-6 ubiquitination (Keating SE et al 2007). Furthermore, the proxyvirus protein A52 - an inhibitor of all IL-1R/TLR pathways to NF-kB activation, was found to interact with both IRAK-2 and TRAF6, but not IRAK-1. Further work showed that A52 inhibits IRAK-2 functions, whereas association with TRAF6 results in A52-induced MAPK activation. The strong inhibition effect of A52 was also observed on the TLR3-NFkB axis and this observation led to the discovery that IRAK-2 is recruited to TLR3 to activate NF-kB (Keating SE et al 2007). Thus, A52 possibly inhibits MyD88-independent TLR3 pathways to NF-kB via targeting IRAK-2 as it does for other IL-1R/TLR pathways, although it remains unclear how IRAK-2 is involved in TLR3 signaling.<p>IRAK-2 was shown to have two TRAF6 binding motifs that are responsible for initiating TRAF6 signaling transduction (Ye H et al 2002).
R-HSA-5603041	IRAK4 deficiency (TLR2/4)	Interleukin-1 receptor-associated kinase 4 (IRAK4) is a serine/threonine kinase, that mediates activation of transcriptional factors such as NFkB and AP1 downstream of IL-1 receptors and all toll like receptors (TLR) except for TLR3 (Suzuki N et al. 2002). IRAK4 is recruited to the TLR receptor complex through a homophilic interaction of the death domains of IRAK4 and adaptor myeloid differentiation factor 88 protein (MyD88) (Motshwene PG et al. 2009; Lin SC et al. 2010). Studies have identified patients with an autosomal recessive (AR) form of IRAK4 deficiency, a health condition with clinical manifestation in infancy or early childhood, that predisposes affected patients to recurrent pyogenic bacterial infection (e.g., Streptococcus pneumoniae and Staphylococcus aureus) (Picard C et al. 2003; Ku CL et al. 2007; Picard C et al. 2010; Picard C et al. 2011). Leukocytes derived from IRAK4-deficient patients display a lack of production of inflammatory cytokines such as TNF alpha, IL-6 and IL-1 beta by whole blood or a lack of CD62 ligand (CD62L) shedding from granulocytes following activation with the most TLR agonists including those of TLR1/2 (Pam3CSK4), TLR2/6 (Pam2CSK4) and TLR4 (LPS) (Picard C et al. 2003; McDonald DR et al. 2006; Ku CL et al. 2007). However, LPS-induced TLR4-mediated production of some cytokines (IL8 and MIP-1beta) was reduced but not abolished (Ku CL et al. 2007). LPS-stimulated induction of type I IFN via MyD88-IRAK4 independent signaling axis was normal or weakly affected suggesting that TLR4 could induce some responses in IRAK4 deficient patients(Yang K et al. 2005).<p>Patients with AR IRAK4 deficiency were found to bear homozygous or compound heterozygous mutations in the IRAK4 gene (Picard C et al. 2003; Ku CL et al. 2007; McDonald DR et al. 2006). Here we describe selected mutations, that have been functionally characterized. Cell-based assay as well as in vitro protein-interaction analyses with IRAK4 variants showed that the loss-of-function of defective IRAK4 is caused by either loss of protein production (reported for IRAK4 Q293X and E402X) or an impaired interaction with MyD88 as shown for missence mutation IRAK4 R12C (Ku CL et al. 2007; Yamamoto T et al. 2014).<p>Besides defective TLR2/4 mediated signaling, the Reactome module describes the impact of functional deficiency of IRAK4 on TLR5 pathways. The module does not include defective TLR7, TLR8 and TLR9 signaling events, which are associated mostly with viral infections, although studies using patient-derived blood cells showed abolished cytokine production by peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) and lack of CD62 ligand (CD62L) shedding from granulocytes in response to TLR7-9 agonists (McDonald DR et al. 2006; von Bernuth H et al. 2006; Ku CL et al. 2007). In addition to the TLR-NFkB signaling axis, endosomic TLR7-9 activates IFN-alpha/beta and IFN-gamma responses and these are also impaired in IRAK4-deficient PBMC (Yang K et al. 2005). Nevertheless, IFN-alpha/beta and -gamma production in IRAK-4-deficient blood cells in response to 9 of 11 viruses was normal or weakly affected, suggesting that IRAK-4-deficient patients may control viral infections by TLR7-9-independent production of IFNs such as IRAK4-independent antiviral RIGI and MDA5 pathways (Yang K et al. 2005). So it is not yet possible to annotate a definitive molecular pathway between IRAK-4 deficiency and changes in TLR7-9 signaling.
R-HSA-5603037	IRAK4 deficiency (TLR5)	Toll like receptor 5 (TLR5) specifically recognizes bacterial infection through binding of flagellin from pathogenic bacteria. Upon ligand binding, TLR5 dimers recruit MyD88 through their TIR domains. Then, MyD88 oligomerizes via its death domain (DD) and TIR domain and interacts with the interleukin-1 receptor-associated kinases (IRAKs) to form the Myddosome complex (MyD88:IRAK4:IRAK1/2) (Motshwene PG et al. 2009; Lin SC et al. 2010). The Myddosome complex transmits the signal leading to activation of transcription factors such as nuclear factor-kappaB (NFkB) and activator protein 1 (AP1). Studies have identified patients with autosomal recessive (AR) form of IRAK4 deficiency, a health condition with clinical manifestation in infancy or early childhood, that predisposes affected patients to recurrent pyogenic bacterial infection (e.g., Streptococcus pneumoniae and Staphylococcus aureus) (Picard C et al. 2003; Ku CL et al. 2007; Picard C et al. 2010; Picard C et al. 2011). Leukocytes derived from IRAK4-deficient patients display a lack of production of inflammatory cytokines such as TNF alpha, IL-6 and IL-1beta or a lack of CD62 ligand (CD62L) shedding from granulocytes following activation with flagellin, the TLR5 agonist (Picard C et al. 2003; McDonald DR et al. 2006; Ku CL et al. 2007). Patients with AR IRAK4 deficiency were found to bear homozygous or compound heterozygous mutations in the IRAK4 gene (Picard C et al. 2003; Ku CL et al. 2007; McDonald DR et al. 2006). Here we describe selective mutations, that have been functionally characterized. Cell-based assays as well as in vitro protein-interaction analyses with IRAK4 variants showed that the loss-of-function of defective IRAK4 can be caused by either an abolished protein production as a result of nonsense mutations (e.g.,Q293X and E402X) or an impaired interaction with MyD88 due to missense mutations (e.g., R12C) (Ku CL et al. 2007; Yamamoto T et al. 2014).<p>IRAK4 mediates immune responses downstream of all TLRs except for TLR3. Besides defective TLR5 signaling, the Reactome module describes the impact of functional deficiency of IRAK4 on TLR2/4 signaling pathways. We did not include defective TLR7, TLR8 and TLR9 signaling events, which are stimulated by nucleic acids upon viral infections, although studies using patients-derived blood cells have showed abolished cytokines production by peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) and lack of CD62 ligand (CD62L) shedding from granulocytes in response to TLR7-9 agonists, i.e.,3M-13 (TLR7), 3M-2 (TLR8), R848 (TLR7 and 8) and CpG (TLR9) (McDonald DR et al. 2006; von Bernuth H et al. 2006; Ku CL et al. 2007). In addition to TLR-NFkB signaling axis the endosomic TLR7-9 activate IFN-alpha/beta and IFN-gamma responses, which have been also impaired in IRAK4-deficient PBMC (Yang K et al. 2005). However, IFN-alpha/beta and IFN-gamma production in response to 9 of 11 viruses tested was normal or weakly affected in IRAK-4-deficient blood cells, suggesting that IRAK-4-deficient patients may control viral infections by TLR7-9-independent production of IFNs (Yang K et al. 2005). So it is not yet possible to annotate a definitive molecular pathway between IRAK-4 deficiency and changes in TLR7-9 signaling.
R-HSA-381070	IRE1alpha activates chaperones	IRE1-alpha is a single-pass transmembrane protein that resides in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) membrane. The C-terminus of IRE1-alpha is located in the cytosol; the N-terminus is located in the ER lumen. In unstressed cells IRE1-alpha exists in an inactive heterodimeric complex with BiP such that BiP in the ER lumen binds the N-terminal region of IRE1-alpha. Upon accumulation of unfolded proteins in the ER, BiP binds the unfolded protein and the IRE1-alpha:BiP complex dissociates. The dissociated IRE1-alpha then forms homodimers. Initially the luminal N-terminal regions pair. This is followed by trans-autophosphorylation of IRE1-alpha at Ser724 in the cytosolic C-terminal region. The phosphorylation causes a conformational change that allows the dimer to bind ADP, causing a further conformational change to yield back-to-back pairing of the cytosolic C-terminal regions of IRE1-alpha. The fully paired IRE1-alpha homodimer has endoribonuclease activity and cleaves the mRNA encoding Xbp-1. A 26 residue polyribonucleotide is released and the 5' and 3' fragments of the original Xbp-1 mRNA are rejoined. The spliced Xbp-1 message encodes Xbp-1 (S), a potent activator of transcription. Xbp-1 (S) together with the ubiquitous transcription factor NF-Y bind the ER Stress Responsive Element (ERSE) in a number of genes encoding chaperones. Recent data suggest that the IRE1-alpha homodimer can also cleave specific subsets of mRNAs, including the insulin (INS) mRNA in pancreatic beta cells.
R-HSA-1606341	IRF3 mediated activation of type 1 IFN	Interferon regulatory factors (IRF) IRF-3 and IRF-7 are the major modulators of IFN gene expression in response to pathogenic molecules. The relative contribution of IRF3 and IRF7 depends on the signaling pathway that is activated. Type I IFN production in cytosolic DNA-sensing pathway is mediated predominantly by IRF3 and partially by IRF7, since DNA-stimulated IFN-beta and IFN-alpha4 mRNA induction was strongly inhibited in IRF3-deficient mouse embryonic fibroblasts (MEFs), while remained normal (IFN-beta) or reduced (IFN-alpha4) in IRF7-deficient MEFs (Takaoke A et al 2007). IRF3 activation in response to B-DNA stimulation occurs via its co-recruitment with serine/threonine kinase TANK-binding kinase 1 (TBK1) or inducible IkB kinase (IKKi/IKKepsilon) to the C-terminal region of DAI.
R-HSA-3270619	IRF3-mediated induction of type I IFN	TANK-binding kinase 1 (TBK1) and interferon regulatory factor 3 (IRF3) are central regulators of type-I interferon induction during bacterial or viral infection. TBK1 was found to form complexes with distinct scaffolding proteins that appeared to target TBK1 to different subcellular compartments [Hemmi H et al 2004; Oganesyan G et al 2006; Chariot A et al 2002; Huang J et al 2005]. STING interacted with both TBK1 and IRF3. Once STING is stimulated, its C-terminus served as a signaling scaffold to recruit IRF3 anhd TBK1, which led to TBK1-dependent phosphorylation of IRF3. Phosphorylation of IRF3 promoted its dimerization and translocation to the nucleus, where it triggered the transcription of interferon stimulated genes (ISGs) (Tanaka Y and Chen ZJ 2012).
R-HSA-917937	Iron uptake and transport	The transport of iron between cells is mediated by transferrin. However, iron can also enter and leave cells not only by itself, but also in the form of heme and siderophores. When entering the cell via the main path (by transferrin endocytosis), its goal is not the (still elusive) chelated iron pool in the cytosol nor the lysosomes but the mitochondria, where heme is synthesized and iron-sulfur clusters are assembled (Kurz et al,2008, Hower et al 2009, Richardson et al 2010).
R-HSA-74713	IRS activation	IRS is one of the mediators of insulin signalling events. It is activated by phosphorylation and triggers a cascade of events involving PI3K, SOS, RAF and the MAP kinases. The proteins mentioned under IRS are examples of IRS family members acting as indicated. More family members are to be confirmed and added in the future. Using receptor mutagenesis studies it is known that IRS1 via its PTB domain binds to the insulin receptor at the juxtamembrane region at tyrosine 972. The interaction is further stabilized by the PH domain of IRS1 which interacts with the phospholipids of the plasma membrane. This allows the receptor to phosphorylate IRS1 on up to 13 of its tyrosine residues. Once phosphorylated the IRS1 falls away from the receptor. (Other IRS family members can also be phosphorylated by the insulin receptor - will be added in the near future.) Now in a tyrosine phosphorylated and hence activated state other proteins can interact with the IRS proteins.
R-HSA-112399	IRS-mediated signalling	Release of phospho-IRS from the insulin receptor triggers a cascade of signalling events via PI3K, SOS, RAF and the MAP kinases.
R-HSA-2428928	IRS-related events triggered by IGF1R	The phosphorylated type 1 insulin-like growth factor receptor phosphorylates IR1, IRS2, IRS4 and possibly other IRS/DOK family members (reviewed in Pavelic et al. 2007, Chitnis et al. 2008, Maki et al. 2010, Parrella et al. 2010, Siddle et al. 2012). The phosphorylated IRS proteins serve as scaffolds that bind the effector molecules PI3K and GRB2:SOS. PI3K then activates PKB (AKT) signaling while GRB2:SOS activates RAS-RAF-MAPK signaling.
R-HSA-1169408	ISG15 antiviral mechanism	Interferon-stimulated gene 15 (ISG15) is a member of the ubiquitin-like (Ubl) family. It is strongly induced upon exposure to type I Interferons (IFNs), viruses, bacterial LPS, and other stresses. Once released the mature ISG15 conjugates with an array of target proteins, a process termed ISGylation. ISGylation utilizes a mechanism similar to ubiquitination, requiring a three-step enzymatic cascade. UBE1L is the ISG15 E1 activating enzyme which specifically activates ISG15 at the expense of ATP. ISG15 is then transfered from E1 to the E2 conjugating enzyme UBCH8 and then to the target protein with the aid of an ISG15 E3 ligase, such as HERC5 and EFP. Hundreds of target proteins for ISGylation have been identified. Several proteins that are part of antiviral signaling pathways, such as RIG-I, MDA5, Mx1, PKR, filamin B, STAT1, IRF3 and JAK1, have been identified as targets for ISGylation. ISG15 also conjugates some viral proteins, inhibiting viral budding and release. ISGylation appears to act either by disrupting the activity of a target protein and/or by altering its localization within the cell.
R-HSA-450321	JNK (c-Jun kinases) phosphorylation and  activation mediated by activated human TAK1	C-Jun NH2 terminal kinases (JNKs) are an evolutionarily conserved family of serine/threonine protein kinases, that belong to mitogen activated protein kinase family (MAPKs - also known as stress-activated protein kinases, SAPKs). The JNK pathway is activated by heat shock, or inflammatory cytokines, or UV radiation. <p>The JNKs are encoded by at least three genes: JNK1/SAPK-gamma, JNK2/SAPK-alpha and JNK3/ SAPK-beta. The first two are ubiquitously expressed, whereas the JNK3 protein is found mainly in brain and to a lesser extent in heart and testes. As a result of alternative gene splicing all cells express distinct active forms of JNK from 46 to 55 kDa in size. Sequence alignment of these different products shows homologies of >80%. In spite of this similarity, the multiple JNK isoforms differ in their ability to bind and phosphorylate different target proteins, thus leading to the distinctive cellular processes: induction of apoptosis, or enhancment of cell survival, or proliferation.<p>Activation of JNKs is mediated by activated TAK1 which phosphorylates two dual specificity enzymes MKK4 (MAPK kinase 4) and MKK7(MAPK kinase 7).
R-HSA-2022854	Keratan sulfate biosynthesis	Keratan sulfate (KSI) is the best characterised keratan sulfate. It is 10 times more abundant in cornea than cartilage. KSI is attached to an asparagine (Asn) residue on the core protein via an N-linked branched oligosaccharide (an N-glycan core structure used as a precursor in N-glycan biosynthesis). KSI is elongated by the alternate additions of galactose (Gal) and N-acetylglucosamine (GlcNAc), mediated by glycosyltransferases. Elongation is terminated by the addition of a single N-acetylneuraminic acid (sialyl) residue. KSI is also sulfated on Gal and GlcNAc residues by at least two sulfotransferases (Funderburgh 2000, Funderburgh 2002, Quantock et al. 2010). KSI can be attached to asparagine residues on core proteins, creating so called proteoglycans (PGs). Seven common core proteins found in corneal and skeletal tissues are used as examples here.
R-HSA-2022857	Keratan sulfate degradation	Keratan sulfate proteoglycans (KSPGs) are degraded in lysosomes as part of normal homeostasis of glycoproteins. Glycoproteins must be completely degraded to avoid undigested fragments building up and causing a variety of lysosomal storage diseases. KSPGs are Asn-linked glycoproteins and are acted upon by exo-glycosidases to release sugar monomers. The main steps of degradation are shown representing the types of cleavage reactions that occur so the full degradation of KS is not shown to avoid repetition. The proteolysis of the core protein of the glycoprotein is not shown here (Winchester 2005, Aronson & Kuranda 1989).
R-HSA-1638074	Keratan sulfate/keratin metabolism	Keratan sulfate (KS) (a glycosaminoglycan, GAG) is a linear polysaccharide that consists of the repeating disaccharide unit GlcNAc-Gal (N-acetylglucosamine-galactose). KS can perform a structural function and is found in bone, cartilage and the cornea. In joints, it also acts as a shock absorber due to its highly hydrated nature. There are several classes of KS, KSI, II and III. KSI is N-linked to asparagine (Asn) residues in the core protein and is predominantly found in the cornea. KSII is O-linked to serine (Ser) or Thr (threonine) residues in the core protein and is found predominantly in cartilage linked to the protein aggrecan, forming the most abundant proteoglycan in cartilage. A third class of KS, KSIII, are proteoglycans in the brain. KSIII chains are linked to Ser/Thr residues in the core protein via mannose (Funderburgh 2000, Funderburgh 2002).<br><br>Normally, the body degrades GAGs as a natural turnover. Defects in the degradative enzymes cause the autosomal recessive mucopolysaccharide storage disease Morquio's syndrome (also called mucopolysaccharidosis IV). This involves the build up of KS in lysosomes, manifesting clinically as skeletal, dental and corneal abnormalities (Tomatsu et al. 2005).
R-HSA-74182	Ketone body metabolism	Acetoacetate, beta-hydroxybutyrate, and acetone collectively are called ketone bodies. The first two are synthesized from acetyl-CoA, in the mitochondria of liver cells; acetone is formed by spontaneous decarboxylation of acetoacetate. Ketone body synthesis in liver is effectively irreversible because the enzyme that catalyzes the conversion of acetoacetate to acetoacetyl-CoA is not present in liver cells.<P>Ketone bodies, unlike fatty acids and triglycerides, are water-soluble. They are exported from the liver, and are taken up by other tissues, notably brain and skeletal and cardiac muscle. There, they are broken down to acetyl-CoA which is oxidized via the TCA cycle to yield energy. In a normal person, this pathway of ketone body synthesis and utilization is most active during extended periods of fasting. Under these conditions, mobilization and breakdown of stored fatty acids generates abundant acetyl-CoA acetyl-CoA in liver cells for synthesis of ketone bodies, and their utilization in other tissues minimizes the demand of these tissues for glucose (Sass 2011).
R-HSA-983189	Kinesins	Kinesins are a superfamily of microtubule-based motor proteins that have diverse functions in transport of vesicles, organelles and chromosomes, and regulate microtubule dynamics. There are 14 families of kinesins, all reprsented in humans. A standardized nomenclature was published in 2004 (Lawrence et al.).
R-HSA-450604	KSRP (KHSRP) binds and destabilizes mRNA	KSRP binds to AU-rich sequences in the 3' untranslated regions of mRNAs. KSRP causes the bound mRNA to be targeted for hydrolysis by recruiting exonucleases and decapping enzymes. The activity of KSRP is regulated by phosphorylation. Protein kinase B/Akt phosphorylates KSRP at serine193. The phosphorylation inhibits the ability of KSRP to destabilize mRNA. KSRP phosphorylated at serine193 binds 14-3-3zeta (YWHAZ) which causes KSRP to be retained in the nucleus.
R-HSA-156827	L13a-mediated translational silencing of Ceruloplasmin expression	While circularization of mRNA during translation initiation is thought to contribute to an increase in the efficiency of translation, it also appears to provide a mechanism for translational silencing. This might be achieved by bringing inhibitory 3' UTR-binding proteins into a position in which they interfere either with the function of the translation initiation complex or with the assembly of the ribosome (Mazumder et al 2001). Translational silencing of Ceruloplasmin (Cp) occurs 16 hrs after its induction by INF-gamma (Mazumder et al., 1997). Although the mechanism by which silencing occurs has not yet been determined, this process is mediated by the L13a subunit of the 60s ribosome and thought to require circularization of the Cp mRNA (Sampath et al., 2003; Mazumder et al., 2001; Mazumder et al., 2003). Between 14 and 16 hrs after INF gamma induction, the L13a subunit of the 60s ribosome is phosphorylated and released from the 60s subunit. Phosphorylated L13a then associates with the GAIT element in the 3' UTR of the Cp mRNA inhibiting its translation.
R-HSA-373760	L1CAM interactions	The L1 family of cell adhesion molecules (L1CAMs) are a subfamily of the immunoglobulin superfamily of transmembrane receptors, comprised of four structurally related proteins: L1, Close Homolog of L1 (CHL1), NrCAM, and Neurofascin. These CAMs contain six Ig like domains, five or six fibronectin like repeats, a transmembrane region and a cytoplasmic domain. The L1CAM family has been implicated in processes integral to nervous system development, including neurite outgrowth, neurite fasciculation and inter neuronal adhesion.<br>L1CAM members are predominately expressed by neuronal, as well as some nonneuronal cells, during development. Except CHL1 all the other members of L1 family contain an alternatively spliced 12-nclueotide exon, encoding the amino acid residues RSLE in the neuronal splice forms but missing in the non-neuronal cells. The extracellular regions of L1CAM members are divergent and differ in their abilities to interact with extracellular, heterophilic ligands. The L1 ligands include other Ig-domain CAMs (such as NCAM, TAG-1/axonin and F11), proteoglycans type molecules (neurocan), beta1 integrins, and extra cellular matrix protein laminin, Neuropilin-1, FGF and EGF receptors. Some of these L1-interacting proteins also bind to other L1CAM members. For example TAG-1/axonin interact with L1 and NrCAM; L1, neurofascin and CHL1 binds to contactin family members. The cytoplasmic domains of L1CAM members are most highly conserved. Nevertheless, they have different cytoplasmic binding partners, and even those with similar binding partners may be involved in different signaling complexes and mechanisms. The most conserved feature of L1CAMs is their ability to interact with the actin cytoskeletal adapter protein ankyrin. The cytoplasmic ankyrin-binding domain, exhibits the highest degree of amino acid conservation throughout the L1 family.
R-HSA-5653890	Lactose synthesis	Synthesis of the disaccharide lactose takes place within the Golgi apparatus of epithelial cells of the lactating mammary gland. The synthesis itself is a single chemical reaction of free glucose and UDP-galactose to form lactose and UDP. For this reaction to occur, glucose is transported from the cytosol into the Golgi lumen, and B4GALT1 interacts with LALBA (alpha-lactalbumin) to modulate its substrate specificity (Brew and Hill 1975).
R-HSA-69186	Lagging Strand Synthesis	Due to the antiparallel nature of DNA, DNA polymerization is unidirectional, and one strand is synthesized discontinuously. This strand is called the lagging strand. Although the polymerase switching on the lagging strand is very similar to that on the leading strand, the processive synthesis on the two strands proceeds quite differently. Short DNA fragments, about 100 bases long, called Okazaki fragments are synthesized on the RNA-DNA primers first. Strand-displacement synthesis occurs, whereby the primer-containing 5'-terminus of the adjacent Okazaki fragment is folded into a single-stranded flap structure. This flap structure is removed by endonucleases, and the adjacent Okazaki fragments are joined by DNA ligase.
R-HSA-3000157	Laminin interactions	Laminins are a large family of conserved, multidomain trimeric basement membrane proteins. There are many theoretical trimer combinations but only 18 have been described (Domogatskaya et al. 2012, Miner 2008, Macdonald et al. 2010) and the existence of isoforms laminin-212 and/or laminin-222 (Durbeej et al. 2010) awaits further confirmation. The chains assemble through coiled-coil domains at their C-terminal end. Alpha chains additionally have a large C-terminal globular domain containing five LG subdomains (LG1-5). The N termini are often referred to as the short arms. These have varying numbers of laminin-type epidermal growth factor-like (LE) repeats. Trimer assembly is controlled by highly specific coiled-coil interactions (Domogatskaya et al. 2012). Some laminin isoforms are modified extracellularly by proteolytic processing at the N- or C-terminal ends prior to their binding to cellular receptors or other matrix molecules (Tzu & Marinkovitch 2008).<br><br>The cell adhesion properties of laminins are mediated primarily through the alpha chain G domain to integrins, dystroglycan, Lutheran glycoprotein, or sulfated glycolipids. The N-terminal globular domains of the alpha-1 (Colognato-Pyke et al. 1995) and alpha-2 chains (Colognato et al. 1997) and globular domains VI (Nielsen & Yamada 2001) and IVa (Sasaki & Timpl 2001) of the alpha-5 chain can bind to several integrin isoforms (alpha1beta1, alpha2beta1, alpha3beta1, and alphaVbeta3), which enables cell binding at both ends of laminins with these alpha chains.
R-HSA-162599	Late Phase of HIV Life Cycle	The late phase of the HIV-1 life cycle includes the regulated expression of the HIV gene products and the assembly of viral particles. The assembly of viral particles will be covered in a later release of Reactome. HIV-1 gene expression is regulated by both cellular and viral proteins. Although the initial activation of the HIV-1 transcription is facilitated by cellular transcription factors including NF-kappa B (Nabel and Baltimore, 1987), this activation results in the production of primarily short transcripts (Kao et al., 1987). Expression of high levels of the full length HIV-1 transcript requires the function of the HIV-1 Tat protein which promotes elongation of the HIV-1 transcript (reviewed in Karn, 1999; Taube et al. 1999; Liou et al., 2004; Barboric and Peterlin 2005). The HIV-1 Rev protein is required post-transcriptionally for the expression of the late genes. Rev functions by promoting the nuclear export of unspliced and partially spliced transcripts that encode the major structural proteins Gag, Pol and Env, and the majority of the accessory proteins (Malim et al., 1989; reviewed in Pollard and Malim 1998 .
R-HSA-1222352	Latent infection of Homo sapiens with Mycobacterium tuberculosis	Infection by <i>Mycobacterium tuberculosis</i> (<i>Mtb</i>) is soon countered by the host's immune system, the organism is however almost never eradicated; ten per cent of infections will develop into "open tuberculosis", while the other ninety per cent become "latent", a state that can persist for decades until loss of immune control. A third of the world's population is estimated to harbour latent tuberculosis. Latent infection involves the bacterium being internalized by macrophages where it stops and counters the innate immune answer (Russell 2011, Russell et al. 2010). When a status-quo is reached, <i>Mtb</i> enters a non-replicating persistent state (Barry et al. 2009, Boshoff & Barry 2005).
R-HSA-171052	LDL-mediated lipid transport	LDL (low density lipoproteins) are complexes of a single molecule of apoprotein B-100 (apoB-100) non-covalently associated with triacylglycerol, free cholesterol, cholesterol esters, and phospholipids. LDL complexes contain single molecules of apoB-100, but their content of lipids is variable (Chapman et al. 1988; Mateu et al. 1972; Tardieu et al. 1976). High levels of LDL in the blood are strongly correlated with increased risk of atherosclerosis, and recent studies have raised the possibility that this risk is further increased in individuals whose blood LDL population is enriched in high-density (low lipid content) LDL complexes (Rizzo and Berneis 2006). The LDL complex annotated here is given a lipid composition that is the average of those measured in the studies by Chapman, Mateu, Tardieu and their colleagues.<p>Annotation of LDL biology in Reactome to date is largely centered on the process of LDL endocytosis. As outlined in the figure below, extracellular low density lipoprotein (LDL) complexes bind to LDL receptors associated with coated pits at the cell surface (a), forming complexes that are internalized and passed via clathrin-coated vesicles (b) to endosomes (c), where they dissociate. The LDL particles move into lysosomes (d) and are degraded while the LDL receptors are returned to the cell surface (e). This process occurs in most cell types but is especially prominent in hepatocytes. It plays a major role in returning cholesterol from peripheral tissues to the liver.<p>Familial hypercholesterolemia due to mutations affecting the LDL receptor (or, rarely, the apolipoprotein B-100 (apoB-100) component of LDL or the LDLRAP1 accessory protein involved in receptor uptake into clathrin-coated vesicles) is one of the commonest human genetic diseases, affecting approximately one person in 500 in many populations worldwide (Hobbs et al. 1990; Jeon and Blacklow 2005).
R-HSA-69109	Leading Strand Synthesis	The processive complex is responsible for synthesizing at least 5-10 kb of DNA in a continuous manner during leading strand synthesis. The incorporation of nucleotides by pol delta is quite accurate. However, incorporation of an incorrect nucleotide does occur occasionally. Misincorporated nucleotides are removed by the 3' to 5' exonucleolytic proofreading capability of pol delta.
R-HSA-166662	Lectin pathway of complement activation	Mannose-binding lectin (MBL) and ficolins (Ficolin-1, Ficolin-2 and Ficolin-3) are Ca-dependent (C-type) lectins, which initiate the complement cascade after binding to specific carbohydrate patterns on the target cell surface. Both MBL and ficolins form oligomers of structural subunits. Each subunit of lectin is composed of three identical polypeptides (Jensen PH et al 2005, Dommett RM et al 2006; Garlatti V et al 2010). MBL and ficolins circulate in plasma in complexes with homodimers of MBL-associated serine proteases (MASP) (Fujita et al. 2004; Hajela et al. 2002). Three types of MASPs, MASP-1, MASP-2 and MASP-3, were reported to mediate the complement activation. Upon binding of human lectin (MBL or ficolins) to the target surface the complex of lectin:MASP undergoes conformational changes, which results in the activation of MASPs by cleavage (Matsushita M et al. 2000; Fujita et al. 2004). Catalytically active MASP-2 cleaves C4 to generate C4a and C4b. C4b binds to the bacterial or foreign cell surface via its thioester bond and then binds circulating C2 (Law and Dodds 1997). Bound C2 is cleaved by MASP-2 to yield the C3 convertase C4b-C2a. Active form of MASP-1 was reported to cleave C2 in a manner similar to MASP-2 (Matsushita M et al. 2000; Chen CB & Wallis R 2004). Besides, MASP-1 was shown to cleave proenzyme MASP-2 leading to the complement activation (Heja D et al. 2012). Moreover, MASP-1 was found to cleave fibrinogen to yield fibrinopeptide B, and cleave and activate factor XIII. MASP-1 may have a role in cleavage of 'dead C3', i.e. C3(H2O) (Hajela et al. 2002).<p>In addition to MASP1,2 and 3 two truncated forms of MASP (MAp44 and sMAP) have been implicated in the complement cascade signaling. MASP-1, MAp44 and MASP-3 are generated from the MASP1-encoded gene by an alternative splicing, while sMAP also known as Map19 is a truncated alternative splicing product of the MASP2 gene (Takahashi M et al. 1999; Degn et al. 2010). The functions of MASP-3, sMAP, and MAp44 in the lectin pathway remain to be clarified.
R-HSA-391906	Leukotriene receptors	Leukotriene receptors bind leukotriene ligands. There are four types of receptor in humans; two for leukotriene B4 and two for cysteinyl leukotrienes (Brink C et al, 2003).
R-HSA-5682910	LGI-ADAM interactions	Synapse formation and maturation require multiple interactions between presynaptic and postsynaptic neurons. These interactions are mediated by a diverse set of synaptogenic proteins (Kegel et al. 2013, Siddiqui & Craig 2011). Initial synapse formation needs both the binding of secreted proteins to presynaptic and postsynaptic receptors, and the direct binding between presynaptic and postsynaptic transmembrane proteins. One class of molecules that plays an important role in cellular interactions in nervous system development and function is the leucine-rich glioma inactivated (LGI) protein family. These are secreted synaptogenic proteins consisting of an LRR (leucine-rich repeat) domain and a epilepsy-associated or EPTP (epitempin) domain (Gu et al. 2002). Both protein domains are generally involved in protein-protein interactions. Genetic and biochemical evidence suggests that the mechanism of action of LGI proteins involves binding to a subset of cell surface receptors belonging to the ADAM (a disintegrin and metalloproteinase) family, i.e. ADAM11, ADAM22 and ADAM23. These interactions play crucial role in the development and function of the vertebrate nervous system mainly mediating synaptic transmission and myelination (Kegel et al. 2013, Novak 2004, Seals & Courtneidge 2003).
R-HSA-140534	Ligand-dependent caspase activation	Caspase-8 is synthesized as zymogen (procaspase-8) and is formed from procaspase-8 as a cleavage product. However, the cleavage itself appears not to be sufficient for the formation of an active caspase-8. Only the coordinated dimerization and cleavage of the zymogen produce efficient activation in vitro and apoptosis in cellular systems [Boatright KM and Salvesen GS 2003; Keller N et al 2010; Oberst A et al 2010].<p>The caspase-8 zymogens are present in the cells as inactive monomers, which are recruited to the death-inducing signaling complex (DISC) by homophilic interactions with the DED domain of FADD. The monomeric zymogens undergo dimerization and the subsequent conformational changes at the receptor complex, which results in the formation of catalytically active form of procaspase-8.[Boatright KM et al 2003; Donepudi M et al 2003; Keller N et al 2010; Oberst A et al 2010].
R-HSA-975298	Ligand-gated ion channel transport	Ligand-gated ion channels (LGICs) are a group of transmembrane ion channels that are opened or closed in response to the binding of a chemical messenger (Purves, 2001).
R-HSA-418889	Ligand-independent caspase activation via DCC	In the presence of Netrin1, DCC and UNC5 generate attractive and repulsive signals to growing axons. In the absence of Netrin-1, DCC induces cell death signaling initiated via caspase cleavage of DCC and the interaction of caspase-9. Recent reports have shown that UNC5 receptors similarly induce apoptosis in the absence of Netrin-1. These reactions proceed without a requirement for cytochrome c release from mitochondria or interaction with apoptotic protease activating factor 1 (APAF1). DCC thus regulates an apoptosome-independent pathway for caspase activation. DCC and UNC-5 are hence defined as dependence receptors. Dependence receptors exhibit dual functions depending on the availability of ligand. They create cellular states of dependence on their respective ligands by either inducing apoptosis when unoccupied by the ligand, or inhibiting apoptosis in the presence of the ligand.
R-HSA-5632681	Ligand-receptor interactions	Repression of Hh signaling in the absence of ligand depends on the transmembrane receptor protein Patched (PTCH), which inhibits Smoothened (SMO) activity by an unknown mechanism. This promotes the proteolytic processing and/or degradation of the GLI family of transcription factors and maintains the pathway in a transcriptionally repressed state (reviewed in Briscoe and Therond, 2013). In the absence of ligand, PTCH is localized in the cilium, while SMO is largely concentrated in intracellular compartments. Upon binding of Hh to the PTCH receptor, PTCH is endocytosed, relieving SMO inhibition and allowing it to accumulate in the primary cilium (Marigo et al, 1996; Chen and Struhl, 1996; Stone et al, 1996; Rohatgi et al, 2007; Corbit et al, 2005; reviewed in Goetz and Anderson, 2010). In the cilium, SMO is activated by an unknown mechanism, allowing the full length transcriptional activator forms of the GLI proteins to accumulate and translocate to the nucleus, where they bind to the promoters of Hh-responsive genes (reviewed in Briscoe and Therond, 2013). <br>In addition to PTCH, three additional membrane proteins have been shown to bind Hh and to be required for Hh-dependent signaling in vertebrates: CDON (CAM-related/downregulated by oncogenes), BOC (brother of CDO) and GAS1 (growth arrest specific 1) (Yao et al, 2006; Okada et al, 2006; Tenzen et al, 2006; McLellan et al, 2008; reviewed in Kang et al, 2007; Beachy et al, 2010; Sanchez-Arrones et al, 2012). CDON and BOC, homologues of Drosophila Ihog and Boi respectively, are evolutionarily conserved transmembrane glycoproteins that have been shown to bind both to Hh ligand and to the canonical receptor PTCH to promote Hh signaling (Okada et al, 2006; Yao et al, 2006; Tenzen et al, 2006, McLellan et al, 2008; Izzi et al, 2011; reviewed in Sanchez-Arrones et al, 2012). Despite the evolutionary conservation, the mode of ligand binding by CDON/Ihog and BOC/Boi is distinct in vertebrates and invertebrates. High affinity ligand-binding by CDON and BOC requires Ca2+, while invertebrate ligand-binding is heparin-dependent (Okada et al, 2006; Tenzen et al, 2006; McLellan et al, 2008; Yao et al, 2006; Kavran et al, 2010). GAS1 is a vertebrate-specific GPI-anchored protein that similarly binds both to Hh ligand and to the PTCH receptor to promote Hh signaling (Martinelli and Fan, 2007; Izzi et al, 2011; reviewed in Kang et al, 2007). CDON, BOC and GAS1 have partially overlapping but not totally redundant roles, and knock-out of all three is required to abrogate Hh signaling in mice (Allen et al, 2011; Izzi et al, 2011; reviewed in Briscoe and Therond, 2013). 
R-HSA-2046105	Linoleic acid (LA) metabolism	Linoleic acid (LA, 18:2(n-6)) is an omega-6 fatty acid obtained through diet, mainly from vegetable oils. Omega-6 fatty acids helps stimulate skin and hair growth, maintain bone health, regulate metabolism, and maintain the reproductive system. All the desaturation and elongation steps occur in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) except for the final step which requires translocation to peroxisomes for partial beta-oxidation. The linoleic acid pathway involves the following steps: 18:2(n-6)-->18:3(n-6)--> 20:3(n-6)-->20:4(n-6)-->22:4(n-6)-->24:4(n-6)-->24:5(n-6)-->22:5(n-6). Two desaturation enzymes are involved in this process: delta-6 desaturase which converts 18:2(n-6) to 18:3 (n-6) and 24:4(n-6) to 24:5(n-6) respectively, and delta-5 desaturase which converts 20:3(n-6) to 20:4(n-6). (Sprecher 2002).
R-HSA-73923	Lipid digestion, mobilization, and transport	Processes annotated here include the digestion of dietary lipids, sterol uptake, the formation and turnover of lipoproteins (chylomicrons, VLDL, LDL, and HDL), and the mobilization of fatty acids through the action of hormone-sensitive lipase.
R-HSA-174824	Lipoprotein metabolism	Because of their hydrophobicity, lipids are found in the extracellular spaces of the human body primarily in the form of lipoprotein complexes. <b>Chylomicrons</b> form in the small intestine and transport dietary lipids to other tissues in the body. <b>Very low density lipoproteins (VLDL)</b> form in the liver and transport triacylglycerol synthesized there to other tissues of the body. As they circulate, VLDL are acted on by lipoprotein lipases on the endothelial surfaces of blood vessels, liberating fatty acids and glycerol to be taken up by tissues and converting the VLDL first to <b>intermediate density lipoproteins (IDL)</b> and then to <b>low density lipoproteins (LDL)</b>. IDL and LDL are cleared from the circulation via a specific cell surface receptor, found in the body primarily on the surfaces of liver cells. <b>High density lipoprotein (HDL)</b> particles, initially formed primarily by the liver, shuttle several kinds of lipids between tissues and other lipoproteins. Notably, they are responsible for the so-called reverse transport of cholesterol from peripheral tissues to LDL for return to the liver.<p>Three aspects of lipoprotein function are currently annotated in Reactome: <b>chylomicron-mediated lipid transport</b>, <b>LDL endocytosis and degradation</b>, and <b>HDL-mediated lipid transport</b>.
R-HSA-446343	Localization of the PINCH-ILK-PARVIN complex to focal adhesions	The interactions among ILK, PINCH, and parvins are necessary but not sufficient for localization of ILK to cell-ECM adhesions (Zhang et al., 2002). Additional proteins that interact with PINCH-ILK-parvin complex components likely participate in mediating its localization (reviewed in Wu, 2004).
R-HSA-2644607	Loss of Function of FBXW7 in Cancer and NOTCH1 Signaling	Loss of function mutations found in FBXW7 in T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia are predominantly dominant negative missense mutations that target one of the three highly conserved arginine residues in the WD repeats of FBXW7 (Thompson et al. 2007, O'Neil et al. 2007). These three arginine residues are part of the FBXW7 substrate binding pocket and each one of them contacts the phosphorylated threonine residue in the conserved substrate phosphodegron region (Orlicky et al. 2003). Specifically, FBXW7 interacts with the PEST domain of NOTCH1 upon phosphorylation of the PEST domain by CDK8 (Fryer et al. 2004). FBXW7 mutants are therefore unable to bind and promote ubiquitination of the NOTCH1 intracellular domain (NICD1), leading to prolonged NICD1 transcriptional activity (Thompson et al. 2007, O'Neil et al. 2007).
R-HSA-3304349	Loss of Function of SMAD2/3 in Cancer	Loss-of-function of SMAD2 and SMAD3 in cancer occurs less frequently than the loss of SMAD4 function and was studied in most detail in colorectal cancer (Fleming et al. 2013).<br><br> <br>Similarly to SMAD4, coding sequence mutations in SMAD2 and SMAD3 in cancer cluster in the MH2 domain, involved in the formation of transcriptionally active heterotrimers with SMAD4. Another region of SMAD2 and SMAD3 that is frequently mutated in cancer is the phosphorylation motif Ser-Ser-X-Ser at the very C-terminus (Fleming et al. 2013). The phosphorylation of this conserved motif by the activated TGF-beta receptor complex is an essential step in SMAD2 and SMAD3 activation and a prerequisite for the formation of heterotrimers with SMAD4 (Chacko et al. 2001, Chacko et al. 2004).<br><br>Smad2 knockout mice die at embryonic day 8.5, with impaired visceral endoderm function and deficiency in mesoderm formation. Smad2+/- heterozygotes appear normal and are fertile (Hamamoto et al. 2002). While polyps of compound Smad2+/-;Apc+/- mice show no difference in the number, size or histopathology from the polyps of Apc+/- mice (Takaku et al. 2002, Hamamoto et al. 2002), Smad2+/-;Apc+/- mice develop extremely large intestinal tumors and multiple invasive cancers not observed in Apc+/- mice. Therefore, loss of Smad2 does not contribute to initiation of intestinal tumorigenesis, but accelerates malignant progression (Hamamoto et al. 2002). Smad3 knockout mice are viable and fertile but die between 4 and 6 months of age from colorectal adenocarcinoma (Zhu et al. 1998), indicating that the loss of Smad3 initiates intestinal tumorigenesis.
R-HSA-3304347	Loss of Function of SMAD4 in Cancer	SMAD4 was identified as a gene homozygously deleted in ~30% of pancreatic cancers and was named DPC4 (DPC stands for deleted in pancreatic cancer). SMAD4 maps to the chromosomal band 18q21.1, and about 90% of pancreatic carcinomas show allelic loss at chromosomal arm 18q (Hahn et al. 1996), while ~50% of pancreatic cancers show some alteration of the SMAD4 gene (reviewed by Schutte et al. 1999).<br><br>Based on COSMIC database (Catalogue Of Somatic Mutations In Cancer) (Forbes et al. 2011), mutations in the coding sequence of SMAD4 gene are frequently found in pancreatic cancer, biliary duct carcinoma and colorectal cancer (reviewed by Schutte et al. 1999). Germline SMAD4 mutations are the cause of juvenile polyposis, an autosomal dominant disease that predisposes affected individuals to hamartomatous polyps and gastrointestinal cancer (Howe et al. 1998). Homozygous Smad4 loss is embryonic lethal in mice (Takaku et al. 1998). Smad4 +/- heterozygotes appear normal but develop intestinal polyps between 6 and12 months of age and these polyps can progress to cancer. Loss of the remaining wild-type Smad4 allele is detectable only at later stages of tumor progression in Smad4+/- mice (Xu et al. 2000). Compound Apc+/-;Smad4+/- mice develop malignant tumors from intestinal polyps more rapidly than Apc+/- mice (Takaku et al. 1998).<br><br>SMAD4 coding sequence mutations are most frequently found in the MH2 domain and impair the formation of SMAD4 heterotrimers with phosphorylated SMAD2 and SMAD3 (Shi et al. 1997, Fleming et al. 2013), thereby impairing SMAD4:SMAD2/3 heterotrimer-mediated transcriptional regulation of TGF-beta responsive genes. MH2 domain is also involved in the formation of SMAD4 homotrimers which may play a role in SMAD4 protein stability (Shi et al. 1997).<br><br>Coding sequence mutations are also found in the MH1 domain of SMAD4. MH1 domain is involved in DNA binding (Dai et al. 1999) and it is also involved in the formation of SMAD4 homotrimers (Hata et al. 1997).
R-HSA-3656534	Loss of Function of TGFBR1 in Cancer	TGF-beta receptor 1 (TGFBR1) loss-of-function is a less frequent mechanism for inactivation of TGF-beta signaling in cancer compared to SMAD4 and TGFBR2 inactivation. Genomic deletion of TGFBR1 locus has been reported in pancreatic cancer (Goggins et al. 1998), biliary duct cancer (Goggins et al. 1998) and lymphoma (Schiemann et al. 1999), while loss-of-function mutations have been reported in breast (Chen et al. 1998) and ovarian cancer (Chen et al. 2001), metastatic head-and-neck cancer (Chen et al. 2001), and in Ferguson-Smith tumors (multiple self-healing squamous epithelioma - MSSE) (Goudie et al. 2011). Loss-of-function mutations mainly affect the ligand-binding extracellular domain of TGFBR1 and the kinase domain of TGFBR1 (Goudie et al. 2011). In the mouse model of colorectal cancer, Tgfbr1 haploinsufficiency cooperates with Apc haploinsufficiency in the development of intestinal tumors (Zeng et al. 2009).
R-HSA-3642278	Loss of Function of TGFBR2 in Cancer	Loss-of-function of transforming growth factor-beta receptor II (TGFBR2) is most prevalent in colorectal cancer. Over 60% of colorectal cancers with microsatellite instability (MSI) harbor inactivating mutations in both alleles of TGFBR2, mostly 1 or 2 bp deletions in the 10 bp adenine repeat that codes for three lysine residues in the extracellular domain of TGFBR2. These small deletions result in a frameshift and a premature stop codon (Markowitz et al. 1995). TGFBR2 kinase domain (KD) mutations are found in ~20% of microsatellite stable (MSS) colorectal cancers and these are mostly missense mutations that results in substitution of conserved amino acids in the kinase domain (Grady et al. 1999), likely impairing the catalytic activity of TGFBR2 KD mutants. The silencing of TGFBR2 gene via promoter methylation has been reported in B-cell lymphoma (Chen et al. 2007). Knockout of murine Tgfbr2 in colonic epithelium promotes azoxymethane-induced colon cancer formation (Biswas et al. 2004) and increases the number of adenomas and adenocarcinomas in Apc+/- mice (Munoz et al. 2006).
R-HSA-380259	Loss of Nlp from mitotic centrosomes	During interphase, Nlp interacts with gamma-tubulin ring complexes (gamma-TuRC), and is thought to contribute to the organization of interphase microtubules (Casenghi et al.,2003). Plk1 is activated at the onset of mitosis and phosphorylates Nlp triggering its displacement from the centrosome (Casenghi et al.,2003). Removal of Nlp appears to contribute to the establishment of a mitotic scaffold with enhanced microtubule nucleation activity.
R-HSA-380284	Loss of proteins required for interphase microtubule organizationfrom the centrosome	In addition to recruiting proteins and complexes necessary for increased microtubule nucleation, centrosomal maturation involves the loss of proteins involved in interphase microtubule organization and centrosome cohesion (Casenghi et al., 2003; Mayor et al., 2002).
R-HSA-3134973	LRR FLII-interacting protein 1 (LRRFIP1) activates type I IFN production	Leucine-rich repeat flightless-interacting protein 1 (LRRFIP1) can bind exogenous double-stranded RNA and double-stranded DNA (Wilson SA et al. 1998; Yang P et al. 2010). LRRFIP1 was shown to mediate Listeria monocytogenes- and vesicular stomatitis virus (VSV)-induced IFN-beta production in mouse primary macrophages by regulating beta-catenin activity. Beta-catenin possibly functions as a transcriptional cofactor of IRF3 to initiate Ifnb1 transcription (Yang P et al. 2010). 
R-HSA-71064	Lysine catabolism	In humans, most catabolism of L-lysine normally proceeds via a sequence of seven reactions which feeds into the pathway for fatty acid catabolism. In the first two reactions, catalyzed by a single enzyme complex, lysine is combined with alpha-ketoglutarate to form saccharopine, which in turn is cleaved and oxidized to yield glutamate and alpha-ketoadipic semialdehyde. The latter molecule is further oxidized to alpha-ketoadipate. Alpha-ketoadipate is oxidatively decarboxylated by the alpha-ketoglutarate dehydrogenase complex (the same enzyme complex responsible for the conversion of alpha-ketoglutarate to succinyl-CoA in the citric acid cycle), yielding glutaryl-CoA. Glutaryl-CoA is converted to crotonyl-CoA, crotonyl-CoA is converted to beta-hydroxybutyryl-CoA, and beta-hydroxybutyryl-CoA is converted to acetoacetyl-CoA. The products of lysine catabolism are thus exclusively ketogenic; i.e., under starvation conditions they can be used for the synthesis of ketone bodies, beta-hydroxybutyrate and acetoacetate, but not for the net synthesis of glucose (Cox 2001; Goodman and Freeman 2001).
R-HSA-5357572	Lysosomal glycogen catabolism	While most glycogen is cytosolic, glycogen granules are also found in lysosomes, which they are thought to enter by autophagy. Once in lysosomes, the polysaccharide component of the granules is degraded by a single enzyme, lysosomal alpha-glucosidase (GAA), which hydrolyzes both alpha(1,4) and alpha(1,6) linkages to yield free glucose (Brown et al. 1970). The fate of the glycogenin protein component of the granules has not been studied; it is thought to be degraded by the diverse lysosomal proteases (Muller et al. 2012).<p>Mutations that reduce the activity of GAA are associated with glycogen storage disease type II (Pompe disease) (Leslie & Tinkle).
R-HSA-432720	Lysosome Vesicle Biogenesis	Proteins that have been synthesized, processed and sorted eventually reach the final steps of the secretory pathway. This pathway is responsible not only for proteins that are secreted from the cell but also enzymes and other resident proteins in the lumen of the ER, Golgi, and lysosomes as well as integral proteins transported in the vesicle membranes. Here the proteins in this secretory pathway are ultimately found in lysososmes.
R-HSA-419408	Lysosphingolipid and LPA receptors	The Lysophospholipid receptor (LPLR) group are members of the G protein-coupled receptor family of integral membrane proteins that are important for lipid signaling. In humans there are eight LPL receptors, each encoded by a separate gene (these genes also sometimes referred to as "Edg" or endothelial differentiation gene). The ligands for LPLRs are the lysophospholipid extracellular signaling molecules, lysophosphatidic acid (LPA) and sphingosine 1-phosphate (S1P). The primary effects are inhibition of adenylyl cyclase and release of calcium from the endoplasmic reticulum, as well as secondary effects of preventing apoptosis and increasing cell proliferation (Contos JJ et al, 2000; An S et al, 1998; Fukushima N and Chun J, 2001).
R-HSA-68886	M Phase	Mitosis, or the M phase, involves nuclear division and cytokinesis, where two identical daughter cells are produced. Mitosis involves prophase, prometaphase, metaphase, anaphase, and telophase. Finally, cytokinesis leads to cell division. The phase between two M phases is called the interphase; it encompasses the G1, S, and G2 phases of the cell cycle.
R-HSA-68874	M/G1 Transition	Finally, progression out of mitosis and division of the cell into two daughters (cytokinesis) requires the inactivation of Cyclin B - Cdc2 by ubiquitin-dependent proteolysis of Cyclin A and B, which is regulated by a large E3 ubiquitin ligase complex known as the Anaphase Promoting Complex (APC).<p>The detailed annotation of the M/G1 transition will be completed in a later version of GK.
R-HSA-1632852	Macroautophagy	Macroautophagy (hereafter referred to as autophagy) acts as a buffer against starvation by liberating building materials and energy sources from cellular components. It has additional roles in embryonic development, removal of apoptotic cells or organelles, antigen presentation, protection against toxins and as a degradation route for aggregate-prone proteins and infectious agents. The dysregulation of autophagy is involved in several human diseases, for example, Crohn's disease, cancer and neurodegeneration (Ravikumar et al. 2010).<br>Autophagy is highly conserved from yeast to humans; much of the machinery was first identified in yeast (see Klionsky et al. 2011). Initially, double-membraned cup-shaped structures called the isolation membrane or phagophore engulf portions of cytoplasm. The membranes fuse to form the autophagosome. In yeast cells, autophagosomes are formed at the phagophore assembly site (PAS) next to the vacuole. In mammals, autophagosomes appear throughout the cytoplasm then move along microtubules towards the microtubule-organising centre. This transport requires microtubules and the function of dynein motor proteins; depolymerization of microtubules or inhibition of dynein-dependent transport results in inhibition of autophagy (Kochl et al. 2006, Kimura et al. 2008). Autophagosomes fuse with lysosomes forming autolysosomes whose contents are degraded by lysosomal hydrolases (Mizushima et al. 2011).<br><br>The origins of the autophagosomal membrane and the incorporation of existing membrane material have been extensively debated. The endoplasmic reticulum (ER), mitochondria, mitochondria-associated ER membranes (MAMs), the Golgi, the plasma membrane and recycling endosomes have all been implicated in the nucleation of the isolation membrane and subsequent growth of the membrane (Lamb et al. 2013). Recently 3D tomographic imaging of isolation membranes has shown the cup-shaped isolation membrane tightly sandwiched between two sheets of ER and physically connected to the ER through a narrow membrane tube (Hayashi-Nishino et al. 2009, Yla-Anttila et al. 2009). This suggests that isolation membrane formation and elongation are guided by adjacent ER sheets, supporting the now prevalent 'ER cradle' model, which suggests that the isolation membrane arises from the ER (Hayashi-Nishino et al. 2009, Shibutani & Yoshimori 2014).<br><br>Autophagy is tightly regulated. The induction of autophagy in response to starvation is partly mediated by inactivation of the mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) (Noda & Ohsumi 1998) and activation of Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK), while energy loss induces autophagy by activation of AMP kinase (AMPK). Other pathways regulating autophagy are regulated by calcium, cyclic AMP, calpains and the inositol trisphosphate (IP3) receptor (Rubinsztein et al. 2012). <br><br>In mammals, two complexes cooperatively produce the isolation membrane. The ULK complex consists of ULK1/2, ATG13, (FIP200) and ATG101 (Alers et al. 2012). The PIK3C3-containing Beclin-1 complex consists of PIK3C3 (Vps34), BECN1 (Beclin-1, Atg6), PIK3R4 (p150, Vps15) and ATG14 (Barkor) (Matsunaga et al. 2009, Zhong et al. 2009). A similar complex where ATG14 is replaced by UVRAG functions later in autophagosome maturation and endocytic traffic (Itakura et al. 2008, Liang et al. 2008). Binding of KIAA0226 to this complex negatively regulates the maturation process (Matsunaga et al. 2009). The ULK and Beclin-1 complexes are recruited to specific autophagosome nucleation regions where they stimulate phosphatidylinositol-3-phosphate (PI3P) production and facilitate the elongation and initial membrane curvature of the phagophore membrane (Carlsson & Simonsen 2015).<br><br>The ULK complex is considered the most upstream component of the mammalian autophagy pathway (Itakura & Mizushima 2010), acting as an integrator of the autophagy signals downstream of mTORC1. It is not fully understood how ULK1 is modulated in response to environmental cues. Phosphorylation plays an essential role (Dunlop & Tee 2013) but it is not clear how phosphorylation regulates ULK1 activities (Ravikumar et al. 2010). ULK1 kinase activity is required for autophagy, but the substrate(s) of ULK1 that mediate its autophagic function are not certain. ULK1 may also have kinase-independent functions in autophagy (Wong et al. 2013). <br><br> PIK3C3 (Vps34) is a class III phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase that produces PI3P. It is essential for the early stages of autophagy and colocalizes strongly with early autophagosome markers (Axe et al. 2008). BECN1 binds several further proteins that affect autophagosome formation. Partners that induce autophagy include AMBRA1 (Fimia et al. 2007), UVRAG (Liang et al. 2006) and SH3GLB1 (Takahashi et al. 2007). Binding of BCL2 or BCL2L1 (Bcl-xL) inhibit autophagy (Pattingre et al. 2005, Ciechomska et al. 2009). The inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate receptor complex that binds BCL2 also interacts with BECN1, inhibiting autophagy (Vincencio et al. 2009). CISD2 (Nutrient-deprivation autophagy factor-1, NAF1), a component in the IP3R complex, interacts with BCL2 at the ER and stabilizes the BCL2-BECN1 interaction (Chang et al. 2010). Starvation leads to activation of c-Jun NH2-terminal kinase-1 (JNK1), which results in the phosphorylation of BCL2 and BCL2L1, which release their binding to BECN1 and thus induces autophagosome formation (Wei et al. 2008). <br><br>AMBRA1 can simultaneously bind dynein and the Beclin-1 complex. During nutrient starvation, AMBRA1 is phosphorylated in a ULK1-dependent manner (Di Bartolomeo et al. 2010). This phosphorylation releases AMBRA1-associated Beclin-1 complexes from dynein and the microtubule network, freeing the complex to translocate to autophagy initiation sites (Di Bartolomeo et al. 2010). <br><br>A characteristic of this early phase of autophagosome formation is the formation of PI3P-enriched ER-associated structures called omegasomes (Axe et al. 2008) or cradles (Hayashi-Nishino et al. 2009). Omegasomes appear to concentrate at or near the connected mitochondria-associated ER membrane (Hamasaki et al. 2013). However, the phagophore also can incorporate existing material from other membrane sources such as ER exit sites (ERES), the ER-Golgi intermediate compartment (ERGIC), the Golgi, the plasma membrane and recycling endosomes (Carlsson & Simonsen 2015). Omegasomes lead to the formation of the isolation membrane or phagophore, which is thought to form de novo by an unknown mechanism (Simonsen & Stenmark 2008, Roberts & Ktistakis 2013). Phagophore expansion is probably mediated by membrane uptake from endomembranes and semi-autonomous organelles (Lamb et al. 2013, Shibutani & Yoshimori 2014).<br><br>ATG9 is a direct target of ULK1. In nutrient-rich conditions mammalian ATG9 is localized to the trans-Golgi network and endosomes (including early, late and recycling endosomes), whereas under starvation conditions it is localized to autophagosomes, in a process that is dependent on ULK1 (Young et al. 2006). ATG9 is believed to play a role in the delivery of vesicles derived from existing membranes to the expanding phagophore (Lamb et al. 2013). Yeast Atg9 forms a complex with Atg2 and Atg18 (Reggiori et al. 2004). <br><br>PI3P produced at the initiation site is sensed by WIPI2b, the mammalian homologue of Atg18 (Polson et al. 2010). WIPI2b then recruits Atg16L1 (Dooley et al. 2014). There are four WIPI proteins in mammalian cells (Proikas-Cezanne et al. 2015). They are all likely bind PI3P and be recruited to membranes but the function of WIPI1, 3 and 4 in autophagy is not yet clear. WIPI4 (WDR45) has been shown to bind Atg2 and to be involved in lipid droplet formation (Velikkakath et al. 2012); mutations in WIPI4 have been shown to cause a neurodegenerative disease (Saitsu et al. 2013).<br><br>The elongation of the membrane that will become the autophagosome is regulated by two ubiquitination-like reactions. First, the ubiquitin-like molecule ATG12 is conjugated to ATG5 by ATG7, which acts as an E1-like activating enzyme, and ATG10, which has a role similar to an E2 ubiquitin-conjugating enzyme. The ATG5:ATG12 complex then interacts non-covalently with ATG16L1. This complex associates with the forming autophagosome but dissociates from completed autophagosomes (Geng & Klionski 2008). The second ubiquitin-like reaction involves the conjugation of ubiquitin-like molecules of the LC3 family (Weidberg et al. 2010). LC3 proteins are conjugated through their C-terminal glycine residues with PE by the E1-like ATG7 and E2-like ATG3. This allows LC3 proteins to associate with the autophagosome membrane. <br><br>The ATG12:ATG5:ATG16L1 complex (Mizushima et al., 2011) acts as an E3 like enzyme for the conjugation of LC3 family proteins (mammalian homologues of yeast Atg8) to phosphatidylethanolamine (PE) (Hanada et al. 2007, Fujita et al. 2008). LC3 PE can be deconjugated by the protease ATG4 (Li et al. 2011, 2012). ATG4 is also responsible for priming LC3 proteins by cleaving the C terminus to expose a glycine residue (Kirisako et al, 2000, Scherz Shouval et al. 2007). LC3 proteins remain associated with autophagosomes until they fuse with lysosomes. The LC3-like proteins inside the resulting autolysosomes are degraded, while those on the cytoplasmic surface are delipidated and recycled. ATG5:ATG12:ATG16L1-positive LC3-negative vesicles represent pre-autophagosomal structures (pre-phagophores and possibly early phagophores), ATG5:ATG12:ATG16L1-positive LC3-positive structures can be considered to be phagophores, and ATG5:ATG12:ATG16L1-negative LC3-positive vesicles can be regarded as mature autophagosomes (Tandia et al. 2011).<br><br>Phagophore expansion is probably mediated by membrane uptake from endomembranes as well as from semiautonomous organelles (Lamb et al. 2013, Shibutani & Yoshimori 2014).<br><br>The mechanisms involved in the closure of the phagophore membrane are poorly understood. As the phagophore is a double-membraned structure, its closure involves the fusion of a narrow opening, a process that is distinct from other membrane fusion events (Carlsson & Simonsen 2015). The topology of the phagophore is similar to that of cytokinesis, viral budding or multivesicular body (MVB) formation. These processes rely on the Endosomal Sorting Complex Required for Transport (ESCRT) (Rusten et al. 2012). ESCRT and associated proteins facilitate membrane budding away from the cytosol and subsequent cleavage of the bud neck (Hurley & Hanson 2010). Several studies have shown that depletion of ESCRT subunits or the regulatory ATPase Vps4 causes an accumulation of autophagosomes (Filimonenko et al. 2007, Rusten et al. 2007) but it is not clear whether ESCRTs are required for autophagosome closure or for autophagosome to endosome fusion. UVRAG is also involved in the maturation step, recruiting proteins that bring about membrane fusion such as the class C Vps proteins, which activate Rab7 thereby promoting fusion with late endosomes and lysosomes (Liang et al. 2008).
R-HSA-450294	MAP kinase activation in TLR cascade	The mitogen activated protein kinase (MAPK) cascade, one of the most ancient and evolutionarily conserved signaling pathways, is involved in many processes of immune responses. The MAP kinases cascade transduces signals from the cell membrane to the nucleus in response to a wide range of stimuli (Chang and Karin, 2001; Johnson et al, 2002). <p>There are three major groups of MAP kinases<ul><li>the extracellular signal-regulated protein kinases ERK1/2, <li>the p38 MAP kinase<li> and the c-Jun NH-terminal kinases JNK.</ul><p>ERK1 and ERK2 are activated in response to growth stimuli. Both JNKs and p38-MAPK are activated in response to a variety of cellular and environmental stresses. The MAP kinases are activated by dual phosphorylation of Thr and Tyr within the tripeptide motif Thr-Xaa-Tyr. The sequence of this tripeptide motif is different in each group of MAP kinases: ERK (Thr-Glu-Tyr); p38 (Thr-Gly-Tyr); and JNK (Thr-Pro-Tyr).<p>MAPK activation is mediated by signal transduction in the conserved three-tiered kinase cascade: MAPKKKK (MAP4K or MKKKK or MAPKKK Kinase) activates the MAPKKK. The MAPKKKs then phosphorylates a dual-specificity protein kinase MAPKK, which in turn phosphorylates the MAPK.<p>The dual specificity MAP kinase kinases (MAPKK or MKK) differ for each group of MAPK. The ERK MAP kinases are activated by the MKK1 and MKK2; the p38 MAP kinases are activated by MKK3, MKK4, and MKK6; and the JNK pathway is activated by MKK4 and MKK7. The ability of MAP kinase kinases (MKKs, or MEKs) to recognize their cognate MAPKs is facilitated by a short docking motif (the D-site) in the MKK N-terminus, which binds to a complementary region on the MAPK. MAPKs then recognize many of their targets using the same strategy, because many MAPK substrates also contain D-sites.<p>The upstream signaling events in the TLR cascade that initiate and mediate the ERK signaling pathway remain unclear.
R-HSA-5674135	MAP2K and MAPK activation	Activated RAF proteins are restricted substrate kinases whose primary downstream targets are the two MAP2K proteins, MAPK2K1 and MAP2K2 (also known as MEK1 and MEK2) (reviewed in Roskoski, 2010, Roskoski, 2012a). Phosphorylation of the MAPK2K activation loop primes them to phosphorylate the primary effector of the activated MAPK pathway, the two MAPK proteins MAPK3 and MAPK1 (also known as ERK1 and 2). Unlike their upstream counterparts, MAPK3 and MAPK1 catalyze the phosphorylation of hundreds of cytoplasmic and nuclear targets including transcription factors and regulatory molecules (reviewed in Roskoski, 2012b). Activation of MAP2K and MAPK proteins downstream of activated RAF generally occurs in the context of a higher order scaffolding complex that regulates the specificity and localization of the pathway (reviewed in Brown and Sacks, 2009; Matallanas et al, 2011).
R-HSA-5684264	MAP3K8 (TPL2)-dependent MAPK1/3 activation	Tumor progression locus-2 (TPL2, also known as COT and MAP3K8) functions as a mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) kinase kinase (MAP3K) in various stress-responsive signaling cascades. MAP3K8 (TPL2) mediates phosphorylation of MAP2Ks (MEK1/2) which in turn phosphorylate MAPK (ERK1/2) (Gantke T et al., 2011).<p>In the absence of extra-cellular signals, cytosolic MAP3K8 (TPL2) is held inactive in the complex with ABIN2 (TNIP2) and NFkB p105 (NFKB1) (Beinke S et al., 2003; Waterfield MR et al., 2003; Lang V et al., 2004). This interaction stabilizes MAP3K8 (TPL2) but also prevents MAP3K8 and NFkB from activating their downstream signaling cascades by inhibiting the kinase activity of MAP3K8 and the proteolysis of NFkB precursor protein p105. Upon activation of MAP3K8 by various stimuli (such as LPS, TNF-alpha, and IL-1 beta), IKBKB phosphorylates NFkB p105 (NFKB1) at Ser927 and Ser932, which trigger p105 proteasomal degradation and releases MAP3K8 from the complex (Beinke S et al., 2003, 2004; Roget K et al., 2012). Simultaneously, MAP3K8 is activated by auto- and/or transphosphorylation (Gantke T et al. 2011; Yang HT et al. 2012). The released active MAP3K8 phosphorylates its substrates, MAP2Ks. The free MAP3K8, however, is also unstable and is targeted for proteasome-mediated degradation, thus restricting prolonged activation of MAP3K8 (TPL2) and its downstream signaling pathways (Waterfield MR et al. 2003; Cho J et al., 2005). Furthermore, partially degraded NFkB p105 (NFKB1) into p50 can dimerize with other NFkB family members to regulate the transcription of target genes.<p>MAP3K8 activity is thought to regulate the dynamics of transcription factors that control an expression of diverse genes involved in growth, differentiation, and inflammation. Suppressing the MAP3K8 kinase activity with selective inhibitors, such as C8-chloronaphthyridine-3-carbonitrile, caused a significant reduction in TNFalpha production in LPS- and IL-1beta-induced both primary human monocytes and human blood (Hall JP et al. 2007). Similar results have been reported for mouse LPS-stimulated RAW264.7 cells (Hirata K et al. 2010). Moreover, LPS-stimulated macrophages derived from Map3k8 knockout mice secreted lower levels of pro-inflammatory cytokines such as TNFalpha, Cox2, Pge2 and CXCL1 (Dumitru CD et al. 2000; Eliopoulos AG et al. 2002). Additionally, bone marrow-derived dendritic cells (BMDCs) and macrophages from Map3k8 knockout mice showed significantly lower expression of IL-1beta in response to LPS, poly IC and LPS/MDP (Mielke et al., 2009). However, several other studies seem to contradict these findings and Map3k8 deficiency in mice has been also reported to enhance pro-inflammatory profiles. Map3k8 deficiency in LPS-stimulated macrophages was associated with an increase in nitric oxide synthase 2 (NOS2) expression (Lpez-Pelez et al., 2011). Similarly, expression of IRAK-M, whose function is to compete with IL-1R-associated kinase (IRAK) family of kinases, was decreased in Map3k8-/- macrophages while levels of TNF and IL6 were elevated (Zacharioudaki et al., 2009). Moreover, significantly higher inflammation level was observed in 12-O-tetradecanoylphorbol-13-acetate (TPA)-treated Map3k8-/- mouse skin compared to WT skin (DeCicco-Skinner K. et al., 2011). Additionally, MAP3K8 activity is associated with NFkB inflammatory pathway. High levels of active p65 NFkB were observed in the nucleus of Map3k8 -/- mouse keratinocytes that dramatically increased within 15-30 minutes of TPA treatment. Similarly, increased p65 NFkB was observed in Map3k8-deficient BMDC both basally and after stimulation with LPS when compared to wild type controls (Mielke et al., 2009). The data opposes the findings that Map3k8-deficient mouse embryo fibroblasts and human Jurkat T cells with kinase domain-deficient protein have a reduction in NFkB activation but only when certain stimuli are administered (Lin et al., 1999; Das S et al., 2005). Thus, it is possible that whether MAP3K8 serves more of a pro-inflammatory or anti-inflammatory role may depend on cell- or tissue type and on stimuli (LPS vs. TPA, etc.) (Mielke et al., 2009; DeCicco-Skinner K. et al., 2012).<p>MAP3K8 has been also studied in the context of carcinogenesis, however the physiological role of MAP3K8 in the etiology of human cancers is also convoluted (Vougioukalaki M et al., 2011; DeCicco-Skinner K. et al., 2012).
R-HSA-5683057	MAPK family signaling cascades	The mitogen activated protein kinases (MAPKs) are a family of conserved protein serine threonine kinases that respond to varied extracellular stimuli to activate intracellular processes including gene expression, metabolism, proliferation, differentiation and apoptosis, among others. <br> The classic MAPK cascades, including the ERK1/2 pathway, the p38 MAPK pathway, the JNK pathway and the ERK5 pathway are characterized by three tiers of sequentially acting, activating kinases (reviewed in Kryiakis and Avruch, 2012; Cargnello and Roux, 2011). The MAPK kinase kinase kinase (MAPKKK), at the top of the cascade, is phosphorylated on serine and threonine residues in response to external stimuli; this phosphorylation often occurs in the context of an interaction between the MAPKKK protein and a member of the RAS/RHO family of small GTP-binding proteins. Activated MAPKKK proteins in turn phosphorylate the dual-specificity MAPK kinase proteins (MAPKK), which ultimately phosphorylate the MAPK proteins in a conserved Thr-X-Tyr motif in the activation loop.<br> Less is known about the activation of the atypical families of MAPKs, which include the ERK3/4 signaling cascade, the ERK7 cascade and the NLK cascade. Although the details are not fully worked out, these MAPK proteins don't appear to be phosphorylated downstream of a 3-tiered kinase system as described above (reviewed in Coulombe and Meloche, 2007; Cargnello and Roux, 2011) . <br> Both conventional and atypical MAPKs are proline-directed serine threonine kinases and, once activated, phosphorylate substrates in the consensus P-X-S/T-P site. Both cytosolic and nuclear targets of MAPK proteins have been identified and upon stimulation, a proportion of the phosphorylated MAPKs relocalize from the cytoplasm to the nucleus. In some cases, nuclear translocation may be accompanied by dimerization, although the relationship between these two events is not fully elaborated (reviewed in Kryiakis and Avruch, 2012; Cargnello and Roux, 2011; Plotnikov et al, 2010).
R-HSA-450282	MAPK targets/ Nuclear events mediated by MAP kinases	MAPKs are protein kinases that, once activated, phosphorylate their specific cytosolic or nuclear substrates at serine and/or threonine residues. Such phosphorylation events can either positively or negatively regulate substrate, and thus entire signaling cascade activity. <p>The major cytosolic target of activated ERKs are RSKs (90 kDa Ribosomal protein S6 Kinase). Active RSKs translocates to the nucleus and phosphorylates such factors as c-Fos(on Ser362), SRF (Serum Response Factor) at Ser103, and CREB (Cyclic AMP Response Element-Binding protein) at Ser133. In the nucleus activated ERKs phosphorylate many other targets such as MSKs (Mitogen- and Stress-activated protein kinases), MNK (MAP interacting kinase) and Elk1 (on Serine383 and Serine389). ERK can directly phosphorylate CREB and also AP-1 components c-Jun and c-Fos. Another important target of ERK is NF-KappaB. Recent studies reveals that nuclear pore proteins are direct substrates for ERK (Kosako H et al, 2009). Other ERK nuclear targets include c-Myc, HSF1 (Heat-Shock Factor-1), STAT1/3 (Signal Transducer and Activator of Transcription-1/3), and many more transcription factors.</p><p>Activated p38 MAPK is able to phosphorylate a variety of substrates, including transcription factors STAT1, p53, ATF2 (Activating transcription factor 2), MEF2 (Myocyte enhancer factor-2), protein kinases MSK1, MNK, MAPKAPK2/3, death/survival molecules (Bcl2, caspases), and cell cycle control factors (cyclin D1).</p><p>JNK, once activated, phosphorylates a range of nuclear substrates, including transcription factors Jun, ATF, Elk1, p53, STAT1/3 and many other factors. JNK has also been shown to directly phosphorylate many nuclear hormone receptors. For example, peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor 1 (PPAR-1) and retinoic acid receptors RXR and RAR are substrates for JNK. Other JNK targets are heterogeneous nuclear ribonucleoprotein K (hnRNP-K) and the Pol I-specific transcription factor TIF-IA, which regulates ribosome synthesis. Other adaptor and scaffold proteins have also been characterized as nonnuclear substrates of JNK. 
R-HSA-112411	MAPK1 (ERK2) activation	Mitogen-activated protein kinase kinase MAP2K2 (also known as MEK2) is a dual threonine and tyrosine recognition kinase that phosphorylates and activates MAPK1 (ERK2) (Ohren et al. 2004; Roskoski 2012). 
R-HSA-5684996	MAPK1/MAPK3 signaling	The extracellular signal regulated kinases (ERKs) 1 and 2, also known as MAPK3 and MAPK1, are phosphorylated by the MAP2Ks 1 and 2 in response to a wide range of extracellular stimuli to promote differentiation, proliferation, cell motility, cell survivial, metabolism and transcription, among others (reviewed in Roskoski, 2012b; McKay and Morrison, 2007; Raman et al, 2007). In the classical pathway, MAPK1/3 activation is triggered by the GEF-mediated activation of RAS at the plasma membrane, leading to the activation of the RAF MAP3Ks (reviewed in McKay and Morrison, 2007; Matallanas et al, 2011; Wellbrock et al, 2004). However, many physiological and pathological stimuli have been found to activate MAPK1/3 independently of RAF and RAS, acting instead through MAP3Ks such as MOS, TPL2 and AMPK (Dawson et al, 2008; Wang et al, 2009; Kuriakose et al, 2014). Activated MAPK1/3 phosphorylate numerous targets in both the nucleus and cytoplasm (reviewed in Yoon and Seger, 2006; Roskoski 2012b).
R-HSA-110056	MAPK3 (ERK1) activation	Mitogen-activated protein kinase kinase MAP2K1 (also known as MEK1) is a dual threonine and tyrosine recognition kinase that phosphorylates and activates MAPK3 (ERK1) (Ohren et al. 2004; Roskoski 2012a). 
R-HSA-5687128	MAPK6/MAPK4 signaling	MAPK6 and MAPK4 (also known as ERK3 and ERK4) are vertebrate-specific atypical MAP kinases. Atypical MAPK are less well characterized than their conventional counterparts, and are generally classified as such based on their lack of activation by MAPKK family members. Unlike the conventional MAPK proteins, which contain a Thr-X-Tyr motif in the activation loop, MAPK6 and 4 have a single Ser-Glu-Gly phospho-acceptor motif (reviewed in Coulombe and Meloche, 2007; Cargnello et al, 2011). MAPK6 is also distinct in being an unstable kinase, whose turnover is mediated by ubiquitin-dependent degradation (Coulombe et al, 2003; Coulombe et al, 2004). The biological functions and pathways governing MAPK6 and 4 are not well established. MAPK6 and 4 are phosphorylated downstream of class I p21 activated kinases (PAKs) in a RAC- or CDC42-dependent manner (Deleris et al, 2008; Perander et al, 2008; Deleris et al, 2011; De La Mota-Peynado et al, 2011). One of the only well established substrates of MAPK6 and 4 is MAPKAPK5, which contributes to cell motility by promoting the HSBP1-dependent rearrangement of F-actin (Gerits et al, 2007; Kostenko et al, 2009a; reviewed in Kostenko et al, 2011b). The atypical MAPKs also contribute to cell motility and invasiveness through the NCOA3:ETV4-dependent regulation of MMP gene expression (Long et al, 2012; Yan et al, 2008; Qin et al, 2008). Both of these pathways may be misregulated in human cancers (reviewed in Myant and Sansom, 2011; Kostenko et al, 2012)
R-HSA-2465910	MASTL Facilitates Mitotic Progression	The activity of MASTL, also known as the Greatwall kinase (GWL), is necessary for the entry and progression of mitosis. MASTL is activated by phosphorylation of several key residues during mitotic entry. Phosphorylation on the serine residue S875 (S883 in Xenopus), likely through autophosphorylation (Blake-Hodek et al. 2012) appears to be critical (Vigneron et al. 2011). Several other sites, including putative CDK1 targets T194, T207 and T741, contribute to the full activation of MASTL (Yu et al. 2006, Blake-Hodek et al. 2012). Other kinases, such as PLK1 (Vigneron et al. 2011) and other MASTL phosphorylation sites may also be functionally important (Yu et al. 2006, Blake-Hodek et al. 2012).<br><br>Activated MASTL phosphorylates ARPP19 and ENSA on serines S62 and S67, respectively, enabling them to bind to and inhibit the phosphatase activity of PP2A complexed with the regulatory subunit PPP2R2D (B55-delta). Inhibition of PP2A-PPP2R2D activity by ARPP19 or ENSA prevents dephosphorylation of CDK1 targets, hence allowing entry and maintenance of mitosis (Mochida et al. 2010, Gharbi-Ayachi et al. 2010, Burgess et al. 2010).<br><br>
R-HSA-1500620	Meiosis	During meiosis the replicated chromosomes of a single diploid cell are segregated into 4 haploid daughter cells by two successive divisions, meiosis I and meiosis II. In meiosis I, the distinguishing event of meiosis, pairs (bivalents) of homologous chromosomes in the form of sister chromatids are paired, synapsed along their regions of homologous DNA (reviewed in Yang and Wang 2009), and then segregated, resulting in haploid daughters containing sister chromatids paired at their centromeres (reviewed in Cohen et al. 2006, Handel and Schimenti 2010). The sister chromatids are then separated and segregated during meiosis II.<br>Recombination between chromosomal homologues but not between sister chromatids occurs during prophase of meiosis I (reviewed in Inagaki et al. 2010). Though hundreds of recombination events are initiated, most are resolved without crossovers and only tens proceed to become crossovers. In mammals recombination events are required between homologues for normal pairing, synapsis, and segregation.
R-HSA-912446	Meiotic recombination	Meiotic recombination exchanges segments of duplex DNA between chromosomal homologs, generating genetic diversity (reviewed in Handel and Schimenti 2010, Inagaki et al. 2010, Cohen et al. 2006). There are two forms of recombination: non-crossover (NCO) and crossover (CO). In mammals, the former is required for correct pairing and synapsis of homologous chromosomes, while CO intermediates called chiasmata are required for correct segregation of bivalents.<br>Meiotic recombination is initiated by double-strand breaks created by SPO11, which remains covalently attached to the 5' ends after cleavage. SPO11 is removed by cleavage of single DNA strands adjacent to the covalent linkage. The resulting 5' ends are further resected to produce protruding 3' ends. The single-stranded 3' ends are bound by RAD51 and DMC1, homologs of RecA that catalyze a search for homology between the bound single strand and duplex DNA of the chromosomal homolog. RAD51 and DMC1 then catalyze the invasion of the single strand into the homologous duplex and the formation of a D-loop heteroduplex. Approximately 90% of heteroduplexes are resolved without crossovers (NCO), probably by synthesis-dependent strand annealing.<br>The invasive strand is extended along the homolog and ligated back to its original duplex, creating a double Holliday junction. The mismatch repair proteins MSH4, MSH5 participate in this process, possibly by stabilizing the duplexes. The mismatch repair proteins MLH1 and MLH3 are then recruited to the double Holliday structure and an unidentified resolvase (Mus81? Gen1?) cleaves the junctions to yield a crossover. <br>Crossovers are not randomly distributed: The histone methyltransferase PRDM9 recruits the recombination machinery to genetically determined hotspots in the genome and each incipient crossover somehow inhibits formation of crossovers nearby, a phenomenon called crossover interference. Each chromosome bivalent, including the X-Y body in males, has at least one crossover and this is required for meiosis to proceed correctly.
R-HSA-1221632	Meiotic synapsis	Meiotic synapsis is the stable physical pairing of homologous chromosomes that begins in leptonema of prophase I and lasts until anaphase of prophase I. First, short segments of axial elements form along chromosomes. Telomeres then cluster at a region of the inner nuclear membrane and axial elements extend and fuse along the length of the chromosomes. Subsequent to the initiation of recombination transverse filaments of SYCP1 link axial/lateral elements to a central element containing SYCE1 and SYCE2, thus forming the synaptonemal complex (reviewed in Yang and Wang 2009).<br>Unsynapsed regions are silenced during pachynema by recruitment of BRCA1 and ATR, which phosphorylates histone H2AX (reviewed in Inagaki et al. 2010).
R-HSA-5662702	Melanin biosynthesis	Melanin biosynthesis takes place in specialized cells called melanocytes, within membrane-bound organelles referred to as melanosomes. Melanosomes are transferred via dendrites to surrounding keratinocytes. Keratinocytes and melanocytes are collectively known as 'the epidermal melanin unit'. Each melanocyte is in contact with approximately 40 keratinocytes in the basal and suprabasal layers (Cichorek et al. 2013). Melanocytes are distributed in the epidermis, hair follicles, the inner ear and the eye (Yamaguchi et al. 2007, Tolleson 2005). <br><br>Melanocytes in mammals and birds produce two chemically distinct types of melanin, black to brown eumelanin and yellow to reddish-brown pheomelanin (Ito & Wakamatsu 2008, Simon et al. 2009, d'Ischia et al. 2013). These differ in their responses to UV radiation; eumelanin has the ability to convert absorbed light energy into heat energy (Meredith & Riesz 2004) and to detoxify reactive oxygen species (ROS) (Bustamante et al. 1993), while pheomelanin is a phototoxic pro-oxidant (Samokhvalov 2005). Most natural melanin pigments contain eumelanin and pheomelanin (Ito & Wakamatsu 2003) and are termed 'mixed' melanins. Neuromelanins are mixed melanin-like pigments which are mainly found in neurons of the substantia nigra and locus coeruleus (Fedorow et al. 2005). Synthesis of NM may prevent the accumulation of toxic catechol derivatives (Zecca et al. 2003). NM can sequester a variety of potentially damaging molecules such as beta-carbolines, heavy metal ions and 1-methyl-4-phenylpyridinium (MPP+) (D'Amato et al. 1986), a drug which causes Parkinson's Disease-like symptoms. Models suggest that mixed melanogenesis occurs in three stages (Ito et al. 2000). The initial stage of melanin biosynthesis is the production of cysteinyldopas, which continues while sufficient cysteine is available. The second stage is the oxidation of cysteinyldopas to produce pheomelanin, which continues while cysteinyldopa concentration is sufficiently high. The last stage is the production of eumelanin, which begins when cysteinyldopas and cysteine are depleted. The ratio of eumelanin to pheomelanin is determined by tyrosinase activity and the availability of tyrosine and cysteine (Land et al. 2003).
R-HSA-174490	Membrane binding and targetting of GAG proteins	One of the mysteries of Gag protein involvement in HIV virion assembly is how the proteins are targeted to the proper membrane for budding. Infectious retroviruses do not bud from all of the available membrane surfaces within an infected cell, but primarily from the plasma membrane, which constitutes a small proportion of the total membrane surface in most cells. In polarized cells, the sites of budding are further restricted to the basolateral membrane.
R-HSA-199991	Membrane Trafficking	The secretory membrane system allows a cell to regulate delivery of newly synthesized proteins, carbohydrates, and lipids to the cell surface, a necessity for growth and homeostasis. The system is made up of distinct organelles, including the endoplasmic reticulum (ER), Golgi complex, plasma membrane, and tubulovesicular transport intermediates. These organelles mediate intracellular membrane transport between themselves and the cell surface. Membrane traffic within this system flows along highly organized directional routes. Secretory cargo is synthesized and assembled in the ER and then transported to the Golgi complex for further processing and maturation. Upon arrival at the trans Golgi network (TGN), the cargo is sorted and packaged into post-Golgi carriers that move through the cytoplasm to fuse with the cell surface. This directional membrane flow is balanced by retrieval pathways that bring membrane and selected proteins back to the compartment of origin.
R-HSA-5579029	Metabolic disorders of biological oxidation enzymes	The ability to process xenobiotica and many endogenous compounds is called biotransformation and is catalysed by enzymes mainly in the liver of higher organisms but also a number of other organs such as kidneys, gut and lungs. Metabolism occurs in two stages; phase 1 functionalisation and phase 2 conjugation. Defects in enzymes in these two phases can lead to disease (Nebert et al. 2013, Pikuleva & Waterman 2013, Zanger & Schwab 2013, Mudd 2013, Messenger et al. 2013, Aoyama & Nakaki 2013, Shih 2004, Millington 2013, Azimi et al. 2014, Sticova & Jirsa 2013).
R-HSA-1430728	Metabolism	Metabolic processes in human cells generate energy through the oxidation of molecules consumed in the diet and mediate the synthesis of diverse essential molecules not taken in the diet as well as the inactivation and elimination of toxic ones generated endogenously or present in the extracellular environment. The processes of energy metabolism can be classified into two groups according to whether they involve carbohydrate-derived or lipid-derived molecules, and within each group it is useful to distinguish processes that mediate the breakdown and oxidation of these molecules to yield energy from ones that mediate their synthesis and storage as internal energy reserves. Synthetic reactions are conveniently grouped by the chemical nature of the end products, such as nucleotides, amino acids and related molecules, and porphyrins. Detoxification reactions (biological oxidations) are likewise conveniently classified by the chemical nature of the toxin.<p>At the same time, all of these processes are tightly integrated. Intermediates in reactions of energy generation are starting materials for biosyntheses of amino acids and other compounds, broad-specificity oxidoreductase enzymes can be involved in both detoxification reactions and biosyntheses, and hormone-mediated signaling processes function to coordinate the operation of energy-generating and energy-storing reactions and to couple these to other biosynthetic processes.
R-HSA-71291	Metabolism of amino acids and derivatives	This group of reactions is responsible for: 1) the breakdown of amino acids; 2) the synthesis of urea from ammonia and amino groups generated by amino acid breakdown; 3) the synthesis of the ten amino acids that are not essential components of the human diet; and 4) the synthesis of related nitrogen-containing molecules including carnitine and creatine.<p>Transport of these molecuels across lipid bilayer membranes is annotated separately as part of the module on "transmembrane transport of small molecules".
R-HSA-2022377	Metabolism of Angiotensinogen to Angiotensins	Angiotensinogen, a prohormone, is synthesized and secreted mainly by the liver but also from other tissues (reviewed in Fyhrquist and Saijonmaa 2008, Cat and Touyz 2011). Renin, an aspartyl protease specific for angiotensinogen, is secreted into the bloodstream by juxtaglomerular cells of the kidney in response to a drop in blood pressure. Renin cleaves angiotensinogen to yield a decapaptide, angiotensin I (angiotensin-1, angiotensin-(1-10)). Circulating renin can also bind the membrane-localized (pro)renin receptor (ATP6AP2) which increases its catalytic activity. After cleavage of angiotensinogen to angiotensin I by renin, two C-terminal amino acid residues of angiotensin I are removed by angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE), located on the surface of endothelial cells, to yield angiotensin II (angiotensin-2, angiotensin-(1-8)), the active peptide that causes vasoconstriction, resorption of sodium and chloride, excretion of potassium, water retention, and aldosterone secretion.<br>More recently other, more tissue-localized pathways leading to angiotensin II and alternative derivatives of angiotensinogen have been identified (reviewed in Kramkowski et al. 2006, Kumar et al. 2007, Fyhrquist and Saijonmaa 2008, Becari et al. 2011). Chymase, cathepsin G, and cathepsin X (cathepsin Z) can each cleave angiotensin I to yield angiotensin II. Angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ACE2) cleaves 1 amino acid residue from angiotensin I (angiotensin-(1-10)) to yield angiotensin-(1-9), which can be cleaved by ACE to yield angiotensin-(1-7). ACE2 can also cleave angiotensin II to yield angiotensin-(1-7). Neprilysin can cleave either angiotensin-(1-9) or angiotensin I to yield angiotensin-(1-7). Angiotensin-(1-7) binds the MAS receptor (MAS1, MAS proto-oncogene) and, interestingly, produces effects opposite to those produced by angiotensin II.<br>Aminopeptidase A (APA, ENPEP) cleaves angiotensin II to yield angiotensin III (angiotensin-(2-8)), which is then cleaved by aminopeptidase N (APN, ANPEP) yielding angiotensin IV (angiotensin-(3-8)). Angiotensin IV binds the AT4 receptor (AT4R, IRAP, LNPEP, oxytocinase).<br>Inhibitors of renin (e.g. aliskiren) and ACE (e.g. lisinopril, ramipril) are currently used to treat hypertension (reviewed in Gerc et al. 2009, Verdecchia et al. 2010, Alreja and Joseph 2011).
R-HSA-71387	Metabolism of carbohydrates	These pathways together are responsible for: 1) the extraction of energy and carbon skeletons for biosyntheses from dietary sugars and related molecules; 2) the short-term storage of glucose in the body (as glycogen) and its mobilization during a short fast; and 3) the synthesis of glucose from pyruvate during extended fasts.
R-HSA-196757	Metabolism of folate and pterines	Folates are essential cofactors that provide one-carbon moieties in various states of reduction for biosynthetic reactions. Processes annotated here include transport reactions by which folates are taken up by cells and moved intracellularly, folate conjugation with glutamate (required for folate retention within a cell), and some of the key reactions in the generation of reduced folates and one-carbon derivatives of folate.
R-HSA-556833	Metabolism of lipids and lipoproteins	Lipids are hydrophobic but otherwise chemically diverse molecules that play a wide variety of roles in human biology. They include ketone bodies, fatty acids, triacylglycerols, phospholipids and sphingolipids, eicosanoids, cholesterol, bile salts, steroid hormones, and fat-soluble vitamins. They function as a major source of energy (fatty acids, triacylglycerols, and ketone bodies), are major constituents of cell membranes (cholesterol and phospholipids), play a major role in their own digestion and uptake (bile salts), and participate in numerous signaling and regulatory processes (steroid hormones, eicosanoids, phosphatidylinositols, and sphingolipids). Because of their poor solubility in water, most lipids in extracellular spaces in the human body are found as complexes with specific carrier proteins. Regulation of the formation and movement of these lipoprotein complexes is a critical aspect of human lipid metabolism, and lipoprotein abnormalities are associated with major human disease processes including atherosclerosis and diabetes.<p>The central steroid in human biology is cholesterol, obtained from animal fats consumed in the diet or synthesized de novo from acetyl-coenzyme A. (Vegetable fats contain various sterols but no cholesterol.) Cholesterol is an essential constituent of lipid bilayer membranes and is the starting point for the biosyntheses of bile acids and salts, steroid hormones, and vitamin D. Bile acids and salts are mostly synthesized in the liver. They are released into the intestine and function as detergents to solubilize dietary fats. Steroid hormones are mostly synthesized in the adrenal gland and gonads. They regulate energy metabolism and stress responses (glucocorticoids), salt balance (mineralocorticoids), and sexual development and function (androgens and estrogens). At the same time, chronically elevated cholesterol levels in the body are associated with the formation of atherosclerotic lesions and hence increased risk of heart attacks and strokes. The human body lacks a mechanism for degrading excess cholesterol, although an appreciable amount is lost daily in the form of bile salts and acids that escape recycling.<p>Aspects of lipid metabolism currently annotated in Reactome include lipid digestion, mobilization, and transport; fatty acid, triacylglycerol, and ketone body metabolism; peroxisomal lipid metabolism; phospholipid and sphingolipid metabolism; cholesterol biosynthesis; bile acid and bile salt metabolism; and steroid hormone biosynthesis.
R-HSA-202131	Metabolism of nitric oxide	Nitric oxide (NO), a multifunctional second messenger, is implicated in physiological functions in mammals that range from immune response and potentiation of synaptic transmission to dilation of blood vessels and muscle relaxation. NO is a highly active molecule that diffuses across cell membranes and cannot be stored inside the producing cell. Its signaling capacity must be controlled at the levels of biosynthesis and local availability. Indeed, NO production by NO synthases is under complex and tight control, being regulated at transcriptional and translational levels, through co- and posttranslational modifications, and by subcellular localization. NO is synthesized from L-arginine by a family of nitric oxide synthases (NOS). Three NOS isoforms have been characterized: neuronal NOS (nNOS, NOS1) primarily found in neuronal tissue and skeletal muscle; inducible NOS (iNOS, NOS2) originally isolated from macrophages and later discovered in many other cells types; and endothelial NOS (eNOS, NOS3) present in vascular endothelial cells, cardiac myocytes, and in blood platelets. The enzymatic activity of all three isoforms is dependent on calmodulin, which binds to nNOS and eNOS at elevated intracellular calcium levels, while it is tightly associated with iNOS even at basal calcium levels. As a result, the enzymatic activity of nNOS and eNOS is modulated by changes in intracellular calcium levels, leading to transient NO production, while iNOS continuously releases NO independent of fluctuations in intracellular calcium levels and is mainly regulated at the gene expression level (Pacher et al. 2007).<p>The NOS enzymes share a common basic structural organization and requirement for substrate cofactors for enzymatic activity. A central calmodulin-binding motif separates an oxygenase (NH2-terminal) domain from a reductase (COOH-terminal) domain. Binding sites for cofactors NADPH, FAD, and FMN are located within the reductase domain, while binding sites for tetrahydrobiopterin (BH4) and heme are located within the oxygenase domain. Once calmodulin binds, it facilitates electron transfer from the cofactors in the reductase domain to heme enabling nitric oxide production. Both nNOS and eNOS contain an additional insert (40-50 amino acids) in the middle of the FMN-binding subdomain that serves as autoinhibitory loop, destabilizing calmodulin binding at low calcium levels and inhibiting electron transfer from FMN to the heme in the absence of calmodulin. iNOS does not contain this insert.<p>Because NOS enzymatic activity is modulated by the presence of its substrates and cofactors within the cell, under certain conditions, NOS may generate superoxide instead of NO, a process referred to as uncoupling (uncoupling of NADPH oxidation and NO synthesis).<p>The molecular details of eNOS function are annotated here.
R-HSA-194441	Metabolism of non-coding RNA	The term non-coding is commonly employed for RNA that does not encode a protein, but this does not mean that such RNAs do not contain information nor have function. There is considerable evidence that the majority of mammalian and other complex organism's genomes is transcribed into non-coding RNAs, many of which are alternatively spliced and/or processed into smaller products. Around 98% of all transcriptional output in humans is non-coding RNA. RNA-mediated gene regulation is widespread in higher eukaryotes and complex genetic phenomena like RNA interference are mediated by such RNAs. These non-coding RNAs are a growing list and include rRNAs, tRNAs, snRNAs, snoRNAs siRNAs, 7SL RNA, 7SK RNA, the RNA component of RNase P RNA, the RNA component of RNase MRP, and the RNA component of telomerase.
R-HSA-15869	Metabolism of nucleotides	Nucleotides and their derivatives are used for short-term energy storage (ATP, GTP), for intra- and extra-cellular signaling (cAMP; adenosine), as enzyme cofactors (NAD, FAD), and for the synthesis of DNA and RNA. Most dietary nucleotides are consumed by gut flora; the human body's own supply of these molecules is synthesized de novo. Additional metabolic pathways allow the interconversion of nucleotides, the salvage and reutilization of nucleotides released by degradation of DNA and RNA, and the catabolism of excess nucleotides (Rudolph 1994). These pathways are regulated to control the total size of the intracellular nucleotide pool, to balance the relative amounts of individual nucleotides, and to couple the synthesis of deoxyribonucleotides to the onset of DNA replication (S phase of the cell cycle).<P>These pathways are also of major clinical interest as they are the means by which nucleotide analogues used as anti-viral and anti-tumor drugs are taken up by cells, activated, and catabolized (Weilin and Nordlund 2010). As well, differences in nuclotide metabolic pathways between humans and aplicomplexan parasites like Plasmodium have been exploited to design drugs to attack the latter (Hyde 2007).<p>The movement of nucleotides and purine and pyrimidine bases across lipid bilayer membranes, mediated by SLC transporters, is annotated as part of the module "transmembrane transport of small molecules".
R-HSA-351202	Metabolism of polyamines	Polyamines is a family of molecules (i.e. putrescine, spermine, spermidine) derived from ornithine according to a decarboxylation/condensative process. More recently, it has been demonstrated that arginine can be metabolised according to the same pathway leading to agmatine formation. Polyamines are essential for the growth, the maintenance and the function of normal cells. The complexity of their metabolism and the fact that polyamines homeostasis is tightly regulated support the idea that polyamines are essential to cell survival. Multiple abnormalities in the control of polyamines metabolism might be implicated in several pathological processes (Moinard et al., 2005). Legend for the following figure:
R-HSA-189445	Metabolism of porphyrins	Porphyrins are heterocyclic macrocycles, consisting of four pyrrole subunits (tetrapyrrole) linked by four methine (=CH-) bridges. The extensive conjugated porphyrin macrocycle is chromatic and the name itself, <b>porphyrin</b>, is derived from the Greek word for <i>purple</i>. The aromatic character of porphyrins can be seen by NMR spectroscopy.<br>Porphyrins readily combine with metals by coordinating them in the central cavity. Iron (heme) and magnesium (chlorophyll) are two well known examples although zinc, copper, nickel and cobalt form other known metal-containing phorphyrins. A porphyrin which has no metal in the cavity is called a <i>free base</i>.<br>Some iron-containing porphyrins are called hemes (heme-containing proteins or hemoproteins) and these are found extensively in nature ie. hemoglobin. Hemoglobin is quantitatively the most important hemoprotein. The hemoglobin iron is the transfer site of oxygen and carries it in the blood all round the body for cell respiration. Other examples are cytochromes present in mitochondria and endoplasmic reticulum which takes part in electron transfer events, catalase and peroxidase whic protect the body against the oxidant hydrogen peroxide and tryptophan oxygenase which is present in intermediary metabolism. Hemoproteins are synthesized in all mammalian cells and the major sites are erythropoietic tissue and the liver.<p>The processes by which heme is synthesized, transported, and metabolized are a critical part of human iron metabolism (Severance and Hamze 2009); here the core processes of heme biosynthesis and catabolism have been annotated.
R-HSA-392499	Metabolism of proteins	Protein metabolism comprises the pathways of translation, post-translational modification and protein folding.
R-HSA-380612	Metabolism of serotonin	Serotonin is first metabolized to 5-hydroxyindole acetaldehyde by monoamine oxidase. 5-hydroxyindole acetaldehyde is then catalyzed by aldehyde dehydrogenase to form 5-hydroxyindole acetic acid.
R-HSA-196071	Metabolism of steroid hormones and vitamin D	Steroid hormones are synthesized primarily in the adrenal gland and gonads. They regulate energy metabolism and stress responses (glucocorticoids), salt balance (mineralocorticoids), and sexual development and function (androgens and estrogens). All steroids are synthesized from cholesterol. Steroid hormone synthesis is largely regulated at the initial steps of cholesterol mobilization and transport into the mitochondrial matrix for conversion to pregnenolone. In the body, the fate of pregnenolone is tissue-specific: in the zona fasciculata of the adrenal cortex it is converted to cortisol, in the zona glomerulosa to aldosterone, and in the gonads to testosterone and then to estrone and estradiol. These pathways are outlined in the figure below, which also details the sites on the cholesterol molecule that undergo modification in the course of these reactions.<p>Vitamin D3 (cholecalciferol) is a steroid hormone that plays a role in regulating calcium and bone metabolism. The processes by which it is synthesized, modified, and transported in the body are annotated here.
R-HSA-196854	Metabolism of vitamins and cofactors	Vitamins are a diverse group of organic compounds, required in small amounts in the diet. They have distinct biochemical roles, often as coenzymes, and are either not synthesized or synthesized only in limited amounts by human cells. Vitamins are classified according to their solubility, either fat-soluble or water-soluble. The physiological processes dependent on vitamin-requiring reactions include many aspects of intermediary metabolism, vision, bone formation, and blood coagulation, and vitamin deficiencies are associated with a correspondingly diverse and severe group of diseases. The metabolism of water-soluble vitamins and of vitamin D are annotated in Reactome.
R-HSA-196849	Metabolism of water-soluble vitamins and cofactors	Vitamins are a diverse group of organic compounds, required in small amounts in the diet. They have distinct biochemical roles, often as coenzymes, and are either not synthesized or synthesized only in limited amounts by human cells. Vitamins are classified according to their solubility, either fat-soluble or water-soluble. The physiological processes dependent on vitamin-requiring reactions include many aspects of intermediary metabolism, vision, bone formation, and blood coagulation, and vitamin deficiencies are associated with a correspondingly diverse and severe group of diseases.<p>Water-soluble vitamins include ascorbate (vitamin C) and the members of the B group: thiamin (vitamin B1), riboflavin (B2), niacin (B3), pantothenate (B5), pyridoxine (B6), biotin (B7), folate (B9), and cobalamin (B12). Metabolic processes annotated here include the synthesis of thiamin pyrophosphate (TPP) from thiamin (B1), the synthesis of FMN and FAD from riboflavin (B2), the synthesis of nicotinic acid (niacin - B3) from tryptophan, the synthesis of Coenzyme A from pantothenate (B5), and features of the metabolism of folate (B9).
R-HSA-425410	Metal ion SLC transporters	Six SLC gene families encode proteins which mediate transport of metals. The families are SLC11, SLC30, SLC31, SLC39, SLC40 and SLC41 (He L et al, 2009; Bressler JP et al, 2007).
R-HSA-1237112	Methionine salvage pathway	Methionine salvage is a sequential pathway of six reactions that create methionine from 5'-methylthioadenosine (MTA) which is a byproduct of polyamine biosynthesis in nearly all organisms. The process happens completely in the cytosol. It is important in humans for recycling of sulphur that has to be assimilated using energy. (Pirkov et al, 2008; Albers, 2009)
R-HSA-156581	Methylation	Methylation is a common but minor pathway of Phase II conjugation compared to glucuronidation or sulfonation. The cofactor used in methylation conjugation is S-adenosylmethionine (SAM). SAM is the second most widely used enzyme substrate after ATP and is involved in a wide range of important biological processes. SAM is sythesized from methionine's reaction with ATP, catalyzed by methionine adenosyltransferase (MAT). There are two genes, MAT1A and MAT2A, which encode for two homologous MAT catalytic subunits, 1 and 2.<br>During conjugation with nucleophilic substrates, the methyl group attached to the sulfonium ion of SAM is transferred to the substrate forming the conjugate. SAM, having lost the methyl moiety, is converted to S-adenosylhomocysteine (SAH). SAH can be hydrolyzed to form adenosine and homocysteine. Homocysteine can either be converted to glutathione or methylated to form methionine, thus forming the starting point for SAM synthesis and completing the cycle.<br>Fuctional groups attacked are phenols, catechols, aliphatic and aromatic amines and sulfhydryl-containing groups. The enzymes that catalyze the transfer of the methyl group to these functional groups are the methyltransferases (MT). MTs are small, cytosolic, monomeric enzymes that utilize SAM as a methyl donor. There are many MTs but the best studied ones are named on the basis of their prototypical substrates: <i><b>COMT</b> (catechol O-methyltransferase)</i>, <i><b>TPMT</b> (thiopurine methyltransferase)</i>, <i><b>TMT</b> (thiol methyltransferase)</i>, <i><b>HNMT</b> (histamine N-methyltransferase)</i> and <i><b>NNMT</b> (nicotinamide N-methyltransferase)</i>. An example of each enzyme mentioned is given. In each case, a typical substrate for the enzyme is shown.
R-HSA-5657655	MGMT-mediated DNA damage reversal	Reactive cellular catabolites can cause DNA damage by 6-O-methylation of guanine. 6-O-methylguanine can pair ambiguously with both C and T, and cause transition mutations. Active reversal of such damage can be facilitated by MGMT, a protein that has 6-O-methylguanine-DNA methyltransferase activity (Mitra and Kaina 1993). 
R-HSA-2132295	MHC class II antigen presentation	Antigen presenting cells (APCs) such as B cells, dendritic cells (DCs) and monocytes/macrophages express major histocompatibility complex class II molecules (MHC II) at their surface and present exogenous antigenic peptides to CD4+ T helper cells. CD4+ T cells play a central role in immune protection. On their activation they stimulate differentiation of B cells into antibody-producing B-cell blasts and initiate adaptive immune responses. MHC class II molecules are transmembrane glycoprotein heterodimers of alpha and beta subunits. Newly synthesized MHC II molecules present in the endoplasmic reticulum bind to a chaperone protein called invariant (Ii) chain. The binding of Ii prevents the premature binding of self antigens to the nascent MHC molecules in the ER and also guides MHC molecules to endocytic compartments. In the acidic endosomal environment, Ii is degraded in a stepwise manner, ultimately to free the class II peptide-binding groove for loading of antigenic peptides. Exogenous antigens are internalized by the APC by receptor mediated endocytosis, phagocytosis or pinocytosis into endocytic compartments of MHC class II positive cells, where engulfed antigens are degraded in a low pH environment by multiple acidic proteases, generating MHC class II epitopes. Antigenic peptides are then loaded into the class II ligand-binding groove. The resulting class II peptide complexes then move to the cell surface, where they are scanned by CD4+ T cells for specific recognition (Berger & Roche 2009, Zhou & Blum 2004, Watts 2004, Landsverk et al. 2009).
R-HSA-203927	MicroRNA (miRNA) biogenesis	Biogenesis of microRNAs (miRNAs) can be summarized in five steps (reviewed in Ketting 2011, Nowotny and Yang 2009, Kim et al. 2009, Chua et al. 2009, Hannon and He 2004):<br>1. Transcription. miRNA transcripts may come from autonomously transcribed genes, they may be contained in cotranscripts with other genes, or they may be located in introns of host genes. Most miRNAs are transcribed by RNA polymerase II, however a few miRNAs originate as RNA polymerase III cotranscripts with neighboring repetitive elements. The initial transcript, termed a primary microRNA (pri-miRNA), contains an imperfectly double-stranded region within a hairpin loop. Longer sequences extend from the 5' and 3' ends of the hairpin and may also contain double-stranded regions. <br>2. Cleavage by DROSHA. The 5' and 3' ends of the pri-miRNA are removed during endoribonucleolytic cleavage by the DROSHA nuclease in a complex with the RNA-binding protein DGCR8 (the Microprocessor complex). The cleavage product is a short hairpin of about 60 to 70 nt called the pre-microRNA (pre-miRNA). <br>3. Nuclear export by Exportin-5. The resulting pre-miRNA is bound by Exportin-5 in a complex with Ran and GTP. The complex translocates the pre-miRNA through the nuclear pore into the cytoplasm. <br>4. Cleavage by DICER1. Once in the cytoplasm the pre-miRNA is bound by the RISC loading complex which contains DICER1, an Argonaute protein and either TARBP2 or PRKRA. DICER1 cleaves the pre-miRNA to yield an imperfectly double-stranded miRNA of about 21 to 23 nucleotides. At this stage the double-stranded miRNA has protruding single-stranded 3' ends of 2-3 nt. <br>5. Incorporation into RNA-Induced Silencing Complex (RISC) and strand selection. The double-stranded miRNA is passed to a Argonaute protein contained in the RISC loading complex. One strand, the passenger strand, will be removed and degraded; the other strand, the guide strand, will be retained and will guide the Argonaute:miRNA complex (RISC) to target mRNAs.<br>The human genome encodes 4 Argonaute proteins (AGO1 (EIF2C1), AGO2 (EIF2C2), AGO3 (EIF2C3), AGO4 (EIF2C4)), however only AGO2 (EIF2C2) can cleave target mRNAs with perfect or nearly perfect complementarity to the guide miRNA. For complexes that contain AGO2, cleavage of the passenger strand of the double-stranded miRNA accompanies removal of the passenger strand. Complexes containing other Argonautes may use a helicase to remove the passenger strand but this is not fully known. The resulting miRNA-loaded AGO2 is predominantly located in complexes with TARBP2 or PRKRA at the cytosolic face of the rough endoplasmic reticulum. AGO2, TARBP2, and DICER1 are also observed in the nucleus.
R-HSA-190840	Microtubule-dependent trafficking of connexons from Golgi to the plasma membrane	Through videomicroscopy, a saltatory transport of connexon vesicles along curvilinear microtubules from the Golgi to the plasma membrane has been observed (Lauf et al., 2002). Such a transport system has been described for similar secretory vesicles (Toomre et al., 1999).
R-HSA-193993	Mineralocorticoid biosynthesis	Aldosterone, the major human mineralocorticoid, is synthesized in the zona glomerulosa of the adrenal cortex from pregnenolone. Pregnenolone is converted to progesterone in two reactions, both catalyzed by 3-beta-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase/isomerase. Progesterone is hydroxylated by CYP21A2 to form deoxycorticosterone, which in turn is converted to aldosterone in a three-reaction sequence catalyzed by CYP11B2 (Payne and Hales 2004).
R-HSA-164516	Minus-strand DNA synthesis	In the first part of reverse transcription, minus-strand synthesis, a DNA strand complementary to the HIV genomic RNA is synthesized, using the viral RNA as a template and a host cell lysine tRNA molecule as primer. The synthesis proceeds in two discrete steps, separated by a strand transfer event. As minus strand DNA is synthesized, the viral genomic RNA is degraded, also in several discrete steps. Two specific polypurine tracts (PPT sequences) in the viral RNA, one within the pol gene (central or cPPT) and one immediately preceding the U3 sequence (3' PPT) are spared from degradation and serve to prime synthesis of DNA complementary to the minus strand (plus-strand synthesis). During plus-strand synthesis, Preston and colleagues observed secondary sites of plus-strand initiation at low frequency both in the cell-free system and in cultured virus (Klarman et al., 1997). Both DNA synthesis and RNA degradation activities are catalyzed by the HIV-1 reverse transcriptase (RT) heterodimer. 
R-HSA-211958	Miscellaneous substrates	Approximately a quarter of the 57 human CYPs still remain "orphans" in the sense that their function, expression sites, and regulation are largely not elucidated. While there is enough experimental evidence to know that all these proteins get made and can catalyze CYP-like reactions in vitro, evidence of in vivo function and substrate specificity is insufficient to allow them to be placed in any of the classes in the functional scheme.
R-HSA-5223345	Miscellaneous transport and binding events	This section contains known transport and binding events that as of yet cannot be placed in exisiting pathways (Purves 2001, He et al. 2009, Rees et al. 2009).
R-HSA-5358508	Mismatch Repair	The mismatch repair (MMR) system corrects single base mismatches and small insertion and deletion loops (IDLs) of unpaired bases. MMR is primarily associated with DNA replication and is highly conserved across prokaryotes and eukaryotes. MMR consists of the following basic steps: a sensor (MutS homologue) detects a mismatch or IDL, the sensor activates a set of proteins (a MutL homologue and an exonuclease) that select the nascent DNA strand to be repaired, nick the strand, exonucleolytically remove a region of nucleotides containing the mismatch, and finally a DNA polymerase resynthesizes the strand and a ligase seals the remaining nick (reviewed in Kolodner and Marsischkny 1999, Iyer et al. 2006, Li 2008, Fukui 2010, Jiricny 2013). <br>Humans have 2 different MutS complexes. The MSH2:MSH6 heterodimer (MutSalpha) recognizes single base mismatches and small loops of one or two unpaired bases. The MSH2:MSH3 heterodimer (MutSbeta) recognizes loops of two or more unpaired bases. Upon binding a mismatch, the MutS complex becomes activated in an ATP-dependent manner allowing for subsequent downstream interactions and movement on the DNA substrate. (There are two mechanisms proposed: a sliding clamp and a switch diffusion model.) Though the order of steps and structural details are not fully known, the activated MutS complex interacts with MLH1:PMS2 (MutLalpha) and PCNA, the sliding clamp present at replication foci. The role of PCNA is multifaceted as it may act as a processivity factor in recruiting MMR proteins to replicating DNA, interact with MLH1:PMS2 and Exonuclease 1 (EXO1) to initiate excision of the recently replicated strand and direct DNA polymerase delta to initiate replacement of bases. MLH1:PMS2 makes an incision in the strand to be repaired and EXO1 extends the incision to make a single-stranded gap of up to 1 kb that removes the mismatched base(s). (Based on assays of purified human proteins, there is also a variant of the mismatch repair pathway that does not require EXO1, however the mechanism is not clear. EXO1 is almost always required, it is possible that the exonuclease activity of DNA polymerase delta may compensate in some situations and it has been proposed that other endonucleases may perform redundant functions in the absence of EXO1.) RPA binds the single-stranded region and a new strand is synthesized across the gap by DNA polymerase delta. The remaining nick is sealed by DNA ligase I (LIG1).<br>Concentrations of MMR proteins MSH2:MSH6 and MLH1:PMS2 increase in human cells during S phase and are at their highest level and activity during this phase of the cell cycle (Edelbrock et al. 2009). Defects in MSH2, MSH6, MLH1, and PMS2 cause hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer (HNPCC, also known as Lynch syndrome) (reviewed in Martin-Lopez and Fishel 2013).
R-HSA-5358606	Mismatch repair (MMR) directed by MSH2:MSH3 (MutSbeta)	MSH2:MSH3 (MutSbeta) binds unpaired loops of 2 or more nucleotides (Palombo et al. 1996, Genschel et al. 1998). Human cells contain about 6-fold more MSH2:MSH6 than MSH2:MSH3 (MutSbeta) and an imbalance in the ratio can cause a mutator phenotype (Drummond et al. 1997, Marra et al. 1998). Binding of the mismatch activates MSH2:MSH3 to exchange ADP for ATP, adopt the conformation to allow movement along the DNA, and interact with downstream effectors PCNA, MLH1:PMS2 and EXO1. The interaction with PCNA initiates excision of the recently replicated strand. MLH1:PMS2 makes a nick that is enlarged to a gap of hundreds of nucleotides by EXO1. DNA is polymerized across the gap by DNA polymerase delta and the remaining nick is sealed by DNA ligase I.
R-HSA-5358565	Mismatch repair (MMR) directed by MSH2:MSH6 (MutSalpha)	MSH2:MSH6 (MutSalpha) binds single base mismatches and unpaired loops of 1-2 nucleotides (reviewed in Edelbrock et al. 2013). Human cells contain about 6-fold more MSH2:MSH6 than MSH2:MSH3 (MutSbeta), which mediates repair of larger mismatches, and an imbalance in the ratio can cause a mutator phenotype (Drummond et al. 1997, Marra et al. 1998). The MSH6 subunit is responsible for binding the mismatch, which activates MSH2:MSH6 to exchange ADP for ATP, adopt the conformation to allow movement on the DNA, and interact with downstream effectors PCNA, MLH1:PMS2 and EXO1. The interaction with PCNA initiates excision of the recently replicated strand. MLH1:PMS2 has endonucleolytic activity and makes a nick that is enlarged to a gap of hundreds of nucleotides by EXO1. DNA is polymerized across the gap by DNA polymerase delta and the remaining nick is sealed by DNA ligase I.
R-HSA-5339716	Misspliced GSK3beta mutants stabilize beta-catenin	GSK3beta is subject to in-frame missplicing in CML stem cells resulting in the production of mutant protein that lacks the AXIN and FRAT binding domains. Cells containing this mutant GSK3beta show elevated levels of nuclear beta-catenin and enhanced TCF-dependent reporter activity (Jamieson et al, 2008; Abrahamsson et al, 2009).
R-HSA-5339717	Misspliced LRP5 mutants have enhanced beta-catenin-dependent signaling	LRP5 is subject to an in-frame missplicing event in breast and parathyroid cancers that renders the protein insensitive to inhibition by the WNT antagonist DKK1. Expression of the mutant protein results in elevated levels of active, unphosphorylated beta-catenin and enhanced TCF-dependent WNT-signaling, promoting cellular proliferation (Bjorklund et al 2007a, b; Bjorklund et al, 2009).
R-HSA-1369007	Mitochondrial ABC transporters	Mammalian ABC transporters are usually found on the plasma membrane and on organelles such as the ER and peroxisome but a small number are also located on the mitochondria. Here they are thought to play roles in heme biosynthesis and iron-sulphur cluster synthesis (Burke & Ardehali 2007).
R-HSA-1592230	Mitochondrial biogenesis	Mitochondrial biogenesis and remodeling occur in response to exercise and redox state (reviewed in Scarpulla et al. 2012, Handy and Loscalzo 2012, Piantadosi and Suliman 2012, Scarpulla 2011, Wenz et al. 2011, Bo et al. 2010, Jornayvaz and Shulman 2010, Ljubicic et al. 2010, Hock and Kralli 2009, Canto and Auwerx 2009, Lin 2009, Scarpulla 2008, Ventura-Clapier et al. 2008). It is hypothesized that calcium influx and energy depletion are the signals that initiate changes in gene expression leading to new mitochondrial proteins. Energy depletion causes a reduction in ATP and an increase in AMP which activates AMPK. AMPK in turn phosphorylates the coactivator PGC-1alpha (PPARGC1A), one of the master regulators of mitochondrial biosynthesis. Likewise, p38 MAPK is activated by muscle contraction (possibly via calcium and CaMKII) and phosphorylates PGC-1alpha. CaMKIV responds to intracellular calcium by phosphorylating CREB, which activates expression of PGC-1alpha.<br>Deacetylation of PGC-1alpha by SIRT1 may also play a role in activation (Canto et al. 2009, Gurd et al. 2011), however Sirt11 deacetylation of Ppargc1a in mouse impacted genes related to glucose metabolism rather than mitochondrial biogenesis (Rodgers et al. 2005) and mice lacking SIRT1 in muscle had normal levels of mitochondrial biogenesis in response to exercise (Philp et al. 2011) so the role of deacetylation is not fully defined. PGC-1beta and PPRC appear to act similarly to PGC-1alpha but they have not been as well studied.<br>Phosphorylated PGC-1alpha does not bind DNA directly but instead interacts with other transcription factors, notably NRF1 and NRF2 (via HCF1). NRF1 and NRF2 together with PGC-1alpha activate the transcription of nuclear-encoded, mitochondrially targeted proteins such as TFB2M, TFB1M, and TFAM.
R-HSA-77289	Mitochondrial Fatty Acid Beta-Oxidation	Beta-oxidation begins once fatty acids have been imported into the mitochondrial matrix by carnitine acyltransferases. The beta-oxidation spiral of fatty acids metabolism involves the repetitive removal of two carbon units from the fatty acyl chain. There are four steps to this process: oxidation, hydration, a second oxidation, and finally thiolysis. The last step releases the two-carbon acetyl-CoA and a ready primed acyl-CoA that takes another turn down the spiral. In total each turn of the beta-oxidation spiral produces one NADH, one FADH2, and one acetyl-CoA.<p>Further oxidation of acetyl-CoA via the tricarboxylic acid cycle generates additional FADH2 and NADH. All reduced cofactors are used by the mitochondrial electron transport chain to form ATP. The complete oxidation of a fatty acid molecule produces numerous ATP molecules. Palmitate, used as the model here, produces 129 ATPs.<p>Beta-oxidation pathways differ for saturated and unsaturated fatty acids. The beta-oxidation of saturated fatty acids requires four different enzymatic steps. Beta-oxidation produces and consumes intermediates with a trans configuration; unsaturated fatty acids that have bonds in the cis configuration require three separate enzymatic steps to prepare these molecules for the beta-oxidation pathway.
R-HSA-77286	mitochondrial fatty acid beta-oxidation of saturated fatty acids	Once fatty acids have been imported into the mitochondrial matrix by the carnitine acyltransferases, the beta-oxidation spiral begins. Each turn of this spiral concludes with the repetitive removal of two carbon units from the fatty acyl chain. beta-oxidation of saturated fatty acids (fatty acids with even numbered carbon chains and no double bonds) involves four different enzymatic steps: oxidation, hydration, a second oxidation, and a concluding thiolysis step, resulting in the two-carbon acetyl-CoA and a newly CoA primed acyl-CoA for the next turn of the spiral.
R-HSA-77288	mitochondrial fatty acid beta-oxidation of unsaturated fatty acids	The complete beta-oxidation spiral produces and consumes intermediates with a trans configuration. Mitochondrial beta-oxidation of unsaturated fatty acids leads to intermediates not compatible with the four enzymatic steps responsible for the beta-oxidation of saturated fatty acids. Unsaturated fatty acids that have bonds in the cis configuration require three separate enzymatic steps to prepare these molecules for the beta-oxidation pathway. The further processing of these intermediates requires additional enzymes, depending on the position of the double bonds in the original fatty acids. Described here is the beta-oxidation of linoleoyl-CoA.
R-HSA-1362409	Mitochondrial iron-sulfur cluster biogenesis	Iron-sulfur (Fe-S) proteins are localized in the cytosol, nucleus, and mitochondria of mammalian cells (reviewed in Stemmler et al. 2010, Rouault 2012, Bandyopadhyay et al. 2008, Lill 2009, Lill et al. 2012). Fe-S protein biogenesis in the mitochondrial matrix involves the iron-sulfur cluster (ISC) assembly machinery. Ferrous iron is transported across the inner mitochondrial membrane into the mitochondrial matrix by Mitoferrin-1 (SLC25A37) and Mitoferrin-2 (SLC25A28). (Mitoferrin-1 is enriched in erythroid cells while Mitoferrin-2 is ubiquitous.) Frataxin binds ferrous iron in the mitochondrial matrix. The cysteine desulfurase NFS1 in a subcomplex with ISD11 provides the sulfur by converting cyteine into alanine and forming a persulfide which is used for cluster formation on ISCU, the scaffold protein. Interaction between NFS1 and ISD11 is necessary for desulfurase activity. Frataxin binds to a complex containing NFS1, ISD11, and ISCU and is proposed to function as an iron donor to ISCU or as an allosteric switch that activates sulfur transfer and Fe-S cluster assembly (Tsai and Barondeau 2010). Cluster formation also involves the electron transfer chain ferredoxin reductase and ferredoxin. ISCU initially forms clusters containing 2 iron atoms and 2 sulfur atoms ([2Fe-2S] clusters). They are released by the function of HSP70-HSC20 chaperones and the monothiol glutaredoxin GLRX5 and used for assembly of [2Fe-2S] proteins. Assembly of larger clusters such as [4Fe-4S] clusters may involve the function of ISCA1, ISCA2, and IBA57. The clusters are transferred to apo-enzymes such as the respiratory complexes, aconitase, and lipoate synthase through dedicated targeting factors such as IND1, NFU1, and BOLA3.
R-HSA-1268020	Mitochondrial protein import	A human mitochondrion contains about 1500 proteins, more than 99% of which are encoded in the nucleus, synthesized in the cytosol and imported into the mitochondrion. Proteins are targeted to four locations (outer membrane, intermembrane space, inner membrane, and matrix) and must be sorted accordingly (reviewed in Kutik et al. 2007, Milenkovic et al. 2007, Bolender et al. 2008, Endo and Yamano 2009). Newly synthesized proteins are transported from the cytosol across the outer membrane by the TOMM40:TOMM70 complex. Proteins that contain presequences first interact with the TOMM20 subunit of the complex while proteins that contain internal targeting elements first interact with the TOMM70 subunit. After initial interaction the protein is conducted across the outer membrane by TOMM40 subunits. In yeast some proteins such as Aco1, Atp1, Cit1, Idh1, and Atp2 have both presequences that interact with TOM20 and mature regions that interact with TOM70 (Yamamoto et al. 2009).<br>After passage across the outer membrane, proteins may be targeted to the outer membrane via the SAMM50 complex, to the inner membrane via the TIMM22 or TIMM23 complexes (reviewed in van der Laan et al. 2010), to the matrix via the TIMM23 complex (reviewed in van der Laan et al. 2010), or proteins may fold and remain in the intermembrane space (reviewed in Stojanovski et al. 2008, Deponte and Hell 2009, Sideris and Tokatlidis 2010). Presequences on matrix and inner membrane proteins cause interaction with TIMM23 complexes; internal targeting sequences cause outer membrane proteins to interact with the SAMM50 complex and inner membrane proteins to interact with the TIMM22 complex. While in the intermembrane space hydrophobic proteins are chaperoned by the TIMM8:TIMM13 complex and/or the TIMM9:TIMM10:FXC1 complex.
R-HSA-163282	Mitochondrial transcription initiation	Human mtDNA is transcribed by a dedicated mitochondrial RNA polymerase (POLRMT), which displays significant sequence similarity to the monomeric RNA polymerases found in bacteriophages. In contrast to the phage T7 RNA polymerase, POLRMT cannot interact with promoter DNA and initiate transcription on its own, but requires the presence of the mitochondrial transcription factor A (TFAM), and either transcription factor B1 (TFB1M) or B2 (TFB2M). The 4 proteins of the basal mitochondrial transcription machinery have been purified in recombinant form and used to reconstitute transcription in vitro with a promoter containing DNA fragment (Falkenberg et al., 2002). Although both TFB1M and TFB2M can support in vitro transcription with POLRMT, TFB2M is at least two orders of magnitude more active than TFB1M and the physiological role of TFB1M in mitochondrial transcription has not yet been completely defined. The TFB1M and TFB2M display primary sequence similarity to a family of rRNA methyltransferases, which dimethylates two adjacent adenosine bases near the 3' end of the small subunit rRNA during ribosome biogenesis (Falkenberg et al., 2002; McCulloch et al., 2002). Human TFB1M is, in fact, a dual function protein, which not only support mitochondrial transcription in vitro, but also acts as a rRNA methyltransferase (Seidel-Rogol et al., 2003). The methyltransferase activity is not required for transcription, since point mutations in conserved methyltransferase motifs of TFB1M revealed that it stimulates transcription in vitro independently of S-adenosylmethionine binding and rRNA methyltransferase activity.
R-HSA-163316	Mitochondrial transcription termination	Transcription of the heavy (H)-strand of mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) involves two overlapping transcription units (Montoyaet al.,1982; Montoya et al., 1983). The first unit starts right upstream of the tRNAPhe gene and spans the tRNAPhe, rRNA 12S, rRNA 16S and tRNAVal genes (initiation site IH1). The other starts about 100 bp further downstream (initiation site IH2), at the boundary between tRNAPhe and rRNA12S genes, and produces a single polycistronic RNA that encompasses almost the entire length of the H-strand. The ribosomal transcription unit is transcribed at a much higher rate compared to the other transcription unit and control of its expression is exerted both at the level of initiation and termination (Gelfand and Attardi, 1981; Attardi et al., 1990). A central role in the control of termination has been attributed to the mitochondrial transcription termination factor (mTERF), a 39-kDa protein that binds to a 28-base pair region of mtDNA located within the tRNALeu(UUR) gene, at a position immediately downstream of the rRNA 16S gene (Fernandez-Silva et al.,1997; Kruse et al., 1989).
R-HSA-5368287	Mitochondrial translation	Of the roughly 1000 human mitochondrial proteins only 13 proteins, all of them hydrophobic inner membrane proteins that are components of the oxidative phosphorylation apparatus, are encoded in the mitochondrial genome and translated by mitoribosomes at the matrix face of the inner membrane (reviewed in Herrmann et al. 2012, Hallberg and Larsson 2014, Lightowlers et al. 2014). The remainder, including all proteins of the mitochondrial translation system, are encoded in the nucleus and imported from the cytosol into the mitochondrion. Translation in the mitochondrion reflects both the bacterial origin of the organelle and subsequent divergent evolution during symbiosis (reviewed in Huot et al. 2014, Richman et al. 2014). Human mitochondrial ribosomes have a low sedimentation coefficient of only 55S, but at 2.71 MDa they retain a similar mass to E. coli 70S particles. The 55S particles are protein-rich compared to both cytosolic ribosomes and eubacterial ribosomes. This is due to shorter mt-rRNAs, mitochondria-specific proteins, and numerous rearrangements in individual protein positions within the two ribosome subunits (inferred from bovine ribosomes in Sharma et al. 2003, Greber et al. 2014, Kaushal et al. 2014, reviewed in Agrawal and Sharma 2012).<br>Mitochondrial mRNAs have either no untranslated leader or short leaders of 1-3 nucleotides, with the exception of the 2 bicistronic transcripts, RNA7 and RNA14, which have overlapping orfs that encode ND4L/ND4 and ATP8/ATP6 respectively. Translation is believed to initiate with the mRNA binding the 28S subunit:MTIF3 (28S subunit:IF-3Mt, 28S subunit:IF2mt) complex together with MTIF2:GTP (IF-2Mt:GTP, IF2mt:GTP) at the matrix face of the inner membrane (reviewed in Christian and Spremulli 2012). MTIF3 can dissociate 55S particles in preparation for initiation, enhances formation of initiation complexes, and inhibits N-formylmethionine-tRNA (fMet-tRNA) binding to 28S subunits in the absence of mRNA. Binding of fMet-tRNA to the start codon of the mRNA results in a stable complex while absence of a start codon at the 5' end of the mRNA causes eventual dissociation of the mRNA from the 28S subunit. After recognition of a start codon, the 39S subunit then binds the stable complex, GTP is hydrolyzed, and the initiation factors MTIF3 and MTIF2:GDP dissociate.<br>Translation elongation then proceeds by cycles of aminoacyl-tRNAs binding, peptide bond formation, and displacement of deacylated tRNAs. In each cycle an aminoacyl-tRNA in a complex with TUFM:GTP (EF-Tu:GTP) binds at the A-site of the ribosome, GTP is hydrolyzed, and TUFM:GDP dissociates. The elongating polypeptide bonded to the tRNA at the P-site is transferred to the aminoacyl group at the A-site by peptide bond formation at the peptidyl transferase center, leaving a deacylated tRNA at the P-site and the elongating polypeptide attached to the tRNA at the A-site. The polypeptide is co-translationally inserted into the inner mitochondrial membrane via an interaction with OXA1L (Haque et al. 2010, reviewed in Ott and Hermann 2010). After peptide bond formation, GFM1:GTP (EF-Gmt:GTP) then binds the ribosome complex, GTP is hydrolyzed, GFM1:GDP dissociates, and the ribosome translocates 3 nucleotides in the 3' direction along the mRNA, relocating the polypeptide-tRNA to the P-site and allowing another cycle to begin. TUFM:GDP is regenerated to TUFM:GTP by the guanine nucleotide exchange factor TSFM (EF-Ts, EF-TsMt).<br>Translation is terminated when MTRF1L:GTP (MTRF1a:GTP) recognizes an UAA or UAG termination codon at the A-site of the ribosome (Tsuboi et al. 2009). GTP hydrolysis does not appear to be required. The tRNA-aminoacyl bond between the translated polypeptide and the final tRNA at the P-site is hydrolyzed by the 39S subunit, facilitating release of the polypeptide. MRRF (RRF) and GFM2:GTP (EF-G2mt:GTP) then act to release the remaining tRNA and mRNA from the ribosome and dissociate the 55S ribosome into 28S and 39S subunits.<br>Mutations have been identified in genes encoding mitochondrial ribosomal proteins and translation factors. These have been shown to be pathogenic, causing neurological and other diseases (reviewed in Koopman et al. 2013, Pearce et al. 2013).
R-HSA-5389840	Mitochondrial translation elongation	Translation elongation proceeds by cycles of aminoacyl-tRNAs binding, peptide bond formation, and displacement of deacylated tRNAs (reviewed in Christian and Spremulli 2012). In each cycle an aminoacyl-tRNA in a complex with TUFM:GTP (EF-Tu:GTP) binds a cognate codon at the A-site of the ribosome, GTP is hydrolyzed, and TUFM:GDP dissociates. The elongating polypeptide bonded to the tRNA at the P-site is transferred to the aminoacyl group at the A-site by peptide bond formation, leaving a deacylated tRNA at the P-site and the elongating polypeptide attached to the tRNA at the A-site. GFM1:GTP (EF-Gmt:GTP) binds, GTP is hydrolyzed, GFM1:GDP dissociates, and the ribosome translocates 3 nucleotides in the 3' direction, relocating the peptidyl-tRNA to the P-site and allowing another cycle to begin. Mitochondrial ribosomes associate with the inner membrane and polypeptides are co-translationally inserted into the membrane (reviewed in Ott and Herrmann 2010, Agrawal and Sharma 2012). TUFM:GDP is regenerated to TUFM:GTP by the guanine nucleotide exchange factor TSFM (EF-Ts, EF-TsMt).
R-HSA-5368286	Mitochondrial translation initiation	Translation initiates with the mitochondrial mRNA binding the 28S subunit:MTIF3 (28S subunit:IF-3Mt, 28S subunit:IF3mt) complex together with MTIF2:GTP (IF-2Mt:GTP, IF2mt:GTP) (reviewed in Christian and Spremulli 2012, Kuzmenko et al. 2014). As inferred from bovine homologs, the 28S subunit, 39S subunit, and 55S holoribosome associate with the matrix-side face of the inner membrane and the translation products are inserted into the inner membrane as translation occurs (Liu and Spremulli 2000). Mitochondrial mRNAs have either no untranslated leader or short leaders of 1-3 nucleotides, with the exception of the 2 bicistronic transcripts, RNA7 and RNA14, which have overlapping orfs that encode ND4L/ND4 and ATP8/ATP6 respectively.. Binding of N-formylmethionine-tRNA to the start codon results in a stable complex between the mRNA and the 28S subunit while absence of a start codon at the 5' end of the mRNA causes the mRNA to slide though the 28S subunit and eventually dissociate. The 39S subunit then binds the 28S subunit:mRNA complex, GTP is hydrolyzed, and the initiation factors MTIF3 and MTIF2:GDP dissociate.
R-HSA-5419276	Mitochondrial translation termination	Translation is terminated when MTRF1L:GTP (MTRF1a:GTP) recognizes a UAA or UAG termination codon in the mRNA at the A site of the ribosome (Soleimanpour-Lichaei et al. 2007, reviewed in Richter et al. 2010, Chrzanowska-Lightowlers et al. 2011. Christian and Spremulli 2012). GTP is hydrolyzed, and the aminoacyl bond between the translated polypeptide and the final tRNA at the P site is hydrolyzed by the 39S ribosomal subunit, releasing the translated polypeptide. MRRF (RRF) and GFM2:GTP (EF-G2mt:GTP) then act to release the remaining tRNA and mRNA from the ribosome and dissociate the 55S ribosome into 28S and 39S subunits.
R-HSA-379726	Mitochondrial tRNA aminoacylation	Mitochondrial tRNA synthetases act in the mitochondrial matrix to catalyze the reactions of tRNAs encoded in the mitochondrial genome, their cognate amino acids, and ATP to form aminoacyl-tRNAs, AMP, and pyrophosphate (Schneider et al. 2000). The synthetase enzymes that catalyze these reactions are all encoded in the nuclear genome. In three cases, glycine, lysine, and glutamine, a single gene encodes two enzyme isoforms, one cytosolic and one mitochondrial. All other mitochondrial tRNA synthetases are encoded by genes different from the ones encoding the corresponding cytosolic enzymes.
R-HSA-166187	Mitochondrial Uncoupling Proteins	Uncoupling proteins (UCPs) are members of the mitochondrial transport carrier family, and have been implicated in a wide range of physiological and pathological conditions. Physiological conditions include thermogenesis, fatty acid metabolism and protection against free radicals and ageing; pathological conditions include involvement in obesity, diabetes and degenerative, neurological and immunological diseases.<br><br>The UCPs share general structural features with the other mitochondrial transport carriers. They have a tripartite structure, consisting of three homologous sequence repeats of approximately 100 residues. The carriers also have a signature motif, which is repeated in all members of the family and in all three repeats. The transmembrane arrangement of UCPs is 6 alpha-helix regions (2 regions per repeat) spanning the lipid bilayer with the amino and carboxyl termini facing the cytosolic side. The crystal structure of one member of the family, the adenine nucleotide translocase, is known, and UCPs can be successfully folded into this structure to indicate their probable 3D arrangement (Pebay-Peyroula et al. 2003, Kunji 2004, Esteves & Brand 2005). The most studied member of the family, UCP1, catalyzes adaptive thermogenesis (i.e. heat generation) in mammalian brown adipose tissue. It does so by promoting a leak of protons through the mitochondrial inner membrane, which uncouples ATP production from substrate oxidation, leading to fast oxygen consumption and ultimately to heat production. The thermogenic activity of UCP1 in brown adipose tissue plays an important role when the organism needs extra heat, e.g. during cold weather conditions (for small rodents), the cold stress of birth or arousal from hibernation. UCP1 homologs have been found in lower vertebrates such as fish, where their role is unclear (Cannon & Nedergaard 2004, Jastroch et al. 2005). The proton conductance of UCP1 in brown adipose tissue is tightly controlled. It is strongly inhibited by physiological concentrations of purine nucleotides. This inhibition is overcome by fatty acids, which are released from intracellular triacylglycerol stores following adrenergic activation in response to cold or overfeeding. Other activators include superoxide, retinoic acid, the retinoid 4-[(E)-2-(5,6,7,8-tetrahydro-5,5,8,8-tetra-methyl-2-naphtalenyl)-1-propenyl]benzoic acid (TTNPB) and reactive alkenals, such as hydroxynonenal. UCP2 and UCP3 have high amino acid sequence homology to UCP1 (59 and 57% amino-acid identity respectively). UCP2 has been identified in lung, spleen, pancreatic beta-cells and kidney, whereas UCP3 is found in brown adipose tissue and skeletal muscle. Homologs of UCP2 and UCP3 are found in marsupials, birds, fish and plants. Despite a low level of sequence homology with UCP1-3, UCP4 and UCP5 share their functional properties (Hoang et al. 2012). There is strong evidence that the regulated uncoupling caused by these proteins attenuates mitochondrial reactive oxygen species production, protects against cellular damage, and (in beta-cells) diminishes insulin secretion. There are also untested suggestions that their transport of fatty acids may be physiologically important (Brand & Esteves 2005, Esteves & Brand 2005, Krauss et al. 2005). The modest depolarization brought about by UCP activation is thought to diminish superoxide generation without significantly compromising ATP production, creating a protective, negative-feedback system that complements enzymatic defences against reactive oxygen species. There is some evidence that this mechanism is important in the etiology of Parkninson's Disease. Deletion of Park7 (DJ-1) decreased the abundance of Ucp5 and Ucp4 mRNA and compromised mitochondrial uncoupling in response to oxidant stress (Guzman et al. 2010). This may explain the unusual accumulation of mitochondrial DNA mutations with age in SNc dopaminergic neurons (Bender et al. 2006). These mutations, which are attributable to accumulated superoxide exposure, diminish mitochondrial competence and promote phenotypic decline, proteostatic impairments and death (Nicholls 2008). A number of models have been proposed for the molecular mechanism by which fatty acids lead to increased proton conductance by UCP1 in brown adipose tissue mitochondria, and presumably by the other UCPs as well. These are the "fatty acid cycling" model and the "proton buffering" model. 
R-HSA-5205647	Mitophagy	Mitophagy is a specific form of autophagy where mitochondria are specifically targeted for degradation by autophagolysosomes.. In mammals there are a number of known mechanisms of mitophagy. One insures maternal inheritance of mitochondrial DNA through the elimination of sperm derived mitochondria. A second is elimination of functional mitochondria during erythrocyte maturation and eye lens maturation. It is established that the outer mitochondrial membrane receptor Nix (or Bnip3l) and autophagosome associated protein LC3 are important for mitochondrial degradation in erythrocytes. A third mechanism is driven by the Pink1 and Parkin proteins. Parkin is recruited to the mitochondria when the mitochondrial membrane potential is reduced due to uncoupling, thereby initiating mitophagy.
R-HSA-68882	Mitotic Anaphase	In anaphase, the paired chromosomes separate at the centromeres, and move to the opposite sides of the cell. The movement of the chromosomes is facilitated by a combination of kinetochore movement along the spindle microtubules and through the physical interaction of polar microtubules.
R-HSA-2555396	Mitotic Metaphase and Anaphase	Metaphase is marked by the formation of the metaphase plate. The metaphase plate is formed when the spindle fibers align the chromosomes along the middle of the cell. Such an organization helps to ensure that later, when the chromosomes are separated, each new nucleus that is formed receives one copy of each chromosome. This pathway has not yet been annotated in Reactome.<br><br>The metaphase to anaphase transition during mitosis is triggered by the destruction of mitotic cyclins.<br><br>In anaphase, the paired chromosomes separate at the centromeres, and move to the opposite sides of the cell. The movement of the chromosomes is facilitated by a combination of kinetochore movement along the spindle microtubules and through the physical interaction of polar microtubules.
R-HSA-68881	Mitotic Metaphase/Anaphase Transition	The metaphase to anaphase transition during mitosis is triggered by the destruction of mitotic cyclins.
R-HSA-68877	Mitotic Prometaphase	The dissolution of the nuclear membrane marks the beginning of the prometaphase. Kinetochores are created when proteins attach to the centromeres. Microtubules then attach at the kinetochores, and the chromosomes begin to move to the metaphase plate. 
R-HSA-68875	Mitotic Prophase	During prophase, the chromatin in the nucleus condenses, and the nucleolus disappears. Centrioles begin moving to the opposite poles or sides of the cell. Some of the fibers that extend from the centromeres cross the cell to form the mitotic spindle.
R-HSA-69618	Mitotic Spindle Checkpoint	The mitotic checkpoint or spindle assembly checkpoint is an evolutionarily conserved mechanism that ensures that cells with misaligned chromosomes do not exit mitosis and divide to form aneuploid cells. As chromosome attachment to the spindle microtubules is a stochastic process, not all chromosomes achieve alignment at the spindle equator at the same time. It is therefore essential that even a single unaligned chromosome can prevent the onset of anaphase. The ability of the checkpoint to monitor the status of chromosome alignment is achieved by assigning checkpoint proteins to the kinetochore, a macromolecular complex that resides at centromeres of chromosomes that establishes connections with spindle microtubules. <P>The checkpoint proteins monitor, in an unknown way, the mechanical activities between kinetochore-associated proteins and microtubules. Defects in mechanical activities at kinetochores activate the resident checkpoint proteins to initiate a signal that is amplified throughout the cell that ultimately prevents the activation of the proteolytic process that is required for sister chromatid separation and the onset of anaphase. Kinetochores of unaligned chromosomes differ from those of aligned chromosomes in two ways. Kinetochores of aligned chromosomes are saturated with between 20 to 30 microtubules. In addition, poleward directed forces exerted at each sister kinetochore generates tension between them. Unaligned kinetochores on the other hand, are not saturated with microtubules and are not under tension. The mitotic checkpoint detects the presence of unattached kinetochores rather than monitoring for the presence of attached kinetochores. Consequently, unattached kinetochores emit an inhibitory signal that inhibits the biochemical events that are required to initiate the onset of anaphase. The mechanism by which this inhibitory signal is generated at unattached kinetochores has not precisely been determined but the signal is generated as a result of the lack of microtubule occupancy and kinetochore tension. A single unattached kinetochore is capable of preventing cells from exiting mitosis. The mitotic checkpoint provides a way for a localized defect to affect the global biochemical status of the cell. In principle, the signal that is generated at an unattached kinetochore diffuses throughout the cell to affect its target. There are currently two models for how this is achieved. One model is based on the observation that the Mad2 checkpoint protein binds and is rapidly released from unattached kinetochores. The kinetochore is believed to act as a catalyst that converts Mad2 into an inhibitory state that diffuses throughout the cell upon its release from the kinetochore. A second model proposes that the signal is amplified by a kinase cascade much like a conventional signal transduction pathway. This kinase cascade is believed to be comprised of the checkpoint kinases, hBUBR1, hBUB1, hMPS1.
R-HSA-68884	Mitotic Telophase/Cytokinesis	In this final phase of mitosis, new membranes are formed around two sets of chromatids and two daughter cells are formed. The chromosomes and the spindle fibers disperse, and the fiber ring around the center of the cell, composed of actin, contracts, pinching the cell into two daughter cells.
R-HSA-2129379	Molecules associated with elastic fibres	Proteins found associated with microfibrils include vitronectin (Dahlback et al. 1990), latent transforming growth factor beta-binding proteins (Kielty et al. 2002, Munger & Sheppard 2011), emilin (Bressan et al. 1993, Mongiat et al. 2000), members of the microfibrillar-associated proteins (MFAPs, Gibson et al.1996), and fibulins (Roark et al. 1995, Yanagisawa et al. 2002). The significance of these interactions is not well understood but may help mediate elastin-fibrillin interactions during elastic fibre assembly.<br><br>Proteoglycans such as versican (Isogai et al. 2002), biglycan, and decorin (Reinboth et al. 2002) can interact with the microfibrils. They confer specific properties including hydration, impact absorption, molecular sieving, regulation of cellular activities, mediation of growth factor association, and release and transport within the extracellular matrix (Buczek-Thomas et al. 2002). In addition, glycosaminoglycans have been shown to interact with tropoelastin through its lysine side chains (Wu et al. 1999) regulating tropoelastin assembly (Tu and Weiss, 2008).
R-HSA-947581	Molybdenum cofactor biosynthesis	Molybdenum cofactor (MoCo) is needed by three enzymes in humans: sulfite oxidase, xanthine oxidase and aldehyde oxidase. The pathway of its synthesis is so conserved that plants and bacteria can readily use human enzymes. Bacteria, however, diverge after the first three steps from this path and their final MoCo differs from that of the eukaryotes. Plants and animals have also developed a refinement of their MoCo which is needed for the function of their xanthine and aldehyde oxidases. This means, in humans we find sulfurated instead of desulfurated molybdenum cofactor on these two enzymes (Schwarz 2005; Schwarz, Mendel, Ribbe 2009).
R-HSA-2206302	MPS I - Hurler syndrome	Mucopolysaccharidosis type I (MPS I, Hurler syndrome, Hurler's disease, gargoylism, Scheie, Hirler-Scheie syndrome; MIM:607014, 607015 and 607016) is an autosomal recessive genetic disorder where there is a deficiency of alpha-L iduronidase (IDUA, MIM:252800), a glycosidase that removes non-reducing terminal alpha-L-iduronide residues during the lysosomal degradation of the glycosaminoglycans heparan sulphate and dermatan sulphate (McKusick 1959). In 1992, Scott and colleagues were able to clone and purify the gene that encodes this enzyme, IDUA, demonstrating that it spans approximately 19 kb and contains 14 exons (Scott et al. 1992).<br>Hurler syndrome is named after a German paediatrician Gertrud Hurler (1919, no reference available). The result is build up of heparan sulfate and dermatan sulfate in the body and increased urinary excretion of these GAGs. Symptoms and signs include hepatosplenomegaly, dwarfism, unique facial features, corneal clouding, retinopathy, progressive mental retardation appears during childhood and early death can occur due to organ damage (Campos & Monaga 2012). MPS I is divided into three subtypes, ranging from severe to mild phenotypes; Mucopolysaccharidosis type IH (MPSIH, Hurler syndrome, MIM:607014), mucopolysaccharidosis type IH/S (MPSIH/S, HurlerScheie syndrome, MIM: 607015) and mucopolysaccharidosis type IS (MPSIS, Scheie syndrome, MIM: 607016) respectively (McKusick 1972).
R-HSA-2206296	MPS II - Hunter syndrome	Mucopolysaccharidosis II (MPS II, Hunter syndrome, MIM:309900) is an X-linked, recessive genetic disorder which therefore primarily affects males. MPS II was first described in 1917, by Major Charles Hunter (Hunter 1917) and is caused by a deficiency (or absence) of iduronate-2-sulfatase (IDS, MIM:300823), which would normally hydrolyse the 2-sulfate groups of the L-iduronate 2-sulfate units of dermatan sulfate, heparan sulfate and heparin. Without IDS, these GAGs accumulate in the body and are excessively excreted in urine. Although the disease was known since the early 1970s, being the first MPS to be defined clinically in humans, it wasn't until the 1990s that IDS was cloned. It is now known to be localized to Xq28 (Wilson et al. 1991) and contain 9 exons (Flomen et al. 1993) spanning approximately 24 kb (Wilson et al. 1993).<br>Build up can occur in the liver and spleen as well as in the walls and valves of the heart (reduced hepatic and cardiac function, liver/spleen hepatosplenomegaly), airways (leading to obstructive airway disease), all major joints and bones (joint stiffness and skeletal deformities) and in brain (severe mental retardation). The rate of progression and degree of severity of the disorder can be different for each person with MPS II. Severe forms of the disorder can result in death in childhood whereas those with a "milder" form can expect to live to their 20's or 30's. Some patients even survive into their fifth and sixth decades of life (Wraith et al. 2008, Beck 2011).
R-HSA-2206307	MPS IIIA - Sanfilippo syndrome A	Mucopolysaccharidosis III (MPS III, Sanfilippo syndrome) was described in 1963 by a pediatrician named Sylvester Sanfilippo (J. Pediat. 63: 837-838, 1963, no reference). Mucopolysaccharidosis IIIA (MPS IIIA, Sanfilippo syndrome A, MIM:252900) is a rare, autosomal recessive lysosomal storage disease characterised by severe CNS degeneration in early childhood leading to death between 10 and 20 years of age. A deficiency of the enzyme N-sulphoglucosamine sulphohydrolase (SGSH, MIM:605270), which normally hydrolyses the sulfate group from the terminal N-sulphoglucosamine residue of heparan sulfate (HS), leads to the build-up of HS in cells and tissues and its presence in urine (van de Kamp et al. 1981, Yogalingam & Hopwood 2001, de Ruijter et al. 2011). The gene encoding N-sulfoglucosamine sulfohydrolase, SGSH, was cloned in 1995 (Scott et al.1995) and, later, shown to contain 8 exons spanning approximately 11 kb (Karageorgos et al. 1996).
R-HSA-2206282	MPS IIIB - Sanfilippo syndrome B	Mucopolysaccharidosis III (Sanfilippo syndrome) was described in 1963 by a pediatrician named Sylvester Sanfilippo (J. Pediat. 63: 837838, 1963, no reference). MPS IIIB (Mucopolysaccharidosis type IIIB, MPS IIIB, Sanfilippo syndrome type B; MIM:252920) is an autosomal recessive genetic disorder due to loss of function of alpha-N-acetylglucosaminidase (NAGLU; MIM:609701), involved in the hydrolysis of terminal non-reducing N-acetylglucosamine residues in heparan sulfate (HS) The gene encoding NAGLU was cloned in 1996 by Zhao and colleagues. It contains 6 exons and spans 8.3 kb on chromosome 17q21 (Zhao et al. 1996). MPSIIIB is characterized by severe CNS retardation but only mild somatic disease and death usually occurs in the second or third decade of life (Zhao et al. 1996, Yogalingam & Hopwood 2001, de Ruijter et al. 2011). MPS IIIB shows extensive molecular heterogeneity (Schmidtchen et al. 1998).
R-HSA-2206291	MPS IIIC - Sanfilippo syndrome C	Mucopolysaccharidosis III (Sanfilippo syndrome) was described in 1963 by a pediatrician named Sylvester Sanfilippo (J. Pediat. 63: 837838, 1963, no reference). Mucopolysaccharidosis type IIIC (MPS IIIC, Sanfilippo syndrome C; MIM:252930) is an autosomal recessive genetic disorder due to the loss of heparan alpha-glucosaminide N-acetyltransferase (HGSNAT; MIM:610453) that normally acetylates the non-reducing terminal alpha-glucosamine residue of heparan sulfate. The molecular defects underlying MPS IIIC remained unknown for almost three decades due to the low tissue content and instability of HGSNAT. But, during the last decade, the gene was cloned in parallel by two different groups and shown to contain 18 exons and span approximately 62Kb (Fan et al. 2006, Hrebicek et al. 2006). Loss of HGSNAT results in build up of this glycosaminglycan (GAG) in cells and tissues and is characterized by severe central nervous system degeneration but only with mild somatic disease and death occurs typically during the second or third decade of life (Kresse et al. 1978, Klein et al. 1978, Feldhammer et al. 2009, de Ruijter et al. 2011).
R-HSA-2206305	MPS IIID - Sanfilippo syndrome D	Mucopolysaccharidosis III (Sanfilippo syndrome) was described in 1963 by a pediatrician named Sylvester Sanfilippo (J. Pediat. 63: 837-838, 1963, no reference). Mucopolysaccharidosis type IIID (MPS IIID, Sanfilippo syndrome D, MIM:252940) is an autosomal recessive genetic disorder due to the loss of N-acetyl-D-glucosamine 6-sulfatase (GNS; MIM:607664), that hydrolyses the 6-sulfate groups of the N-acetyl-D-glucosamine 6-sulfate units of the glycosaminoglycans (GAGs) heparan sulfate and keratan sulfate. GNS is localized to chromosome 12q14 and has 14 exons spanning 46 kb (Robertson et al. 1988, Mok et al. 2003). Loss of enzyme activity leads to lysosomal accumulation and urinary excretion of heparan sulfate and N-acetylglucosamine 6-sulfate residues (Mok et al. 2003). Keratan sulphate does not accumulate in MPS IIID, as beta-linked N-acetyl-D-glucosamine 6-sulphate can be cleaved by beta-hexosaminidase A (Kresse et al. 1980). This disorder is characterized by progressive mental deterioration but only moderate physical abnormalities and death duing the second or third decade of life, presenting a phenotype similar to MPSIIIA (Jones et al. 1997, de Ruijter et al. 2011).
R-HSA-2206290	MPS IV - Morquio syndrome A	Mucopolysaccharidosis IV A (MPS IVA, MPS4A, Morquio's syndrome, Morquio's; MIM:253000) is a rare, autosomal recessive mucopolysaccharide storage disease, first described simultaneously in 1929 by L Morquio (Morquio L, Sur une forme de distrophie familiale, Bull Soc Pediat, Paris, 27, 1929, 145-152) and JF Brailsford (Brailsford, JF, Chondro-osteo-dystrophy: roentgenographic and clinical features of child with dislocation of vertebrae, Am j Surg, 7, 1929, 404-410). MPSIVA is caused by a deficiency in N-acetylgalactosamine 6-sulfatase (GALNS; MIM:612222) which normally hydrolyses 6-sulfate groups of N-acetylgalactosamine 6-sulfate units of chondroitin sulfate (CS) and of galactose 6-sulfate units of keratan sulfate (KS) (Matalon et al. 1974). The result is accumulation of KS/DS in cells and overexcretion in urine. Severe osteochondrodysplasia is a commonly seen phenotype for this disease. The severity of the disease is variable but severe cases limits lifespan to their 20's or 30's (Prat et al. 2008, Tomatsu et al. 2011). The gene coding for human GALNS was mapped to chromosome 16q24.3 (Masuno et al. 1993) and its structure described at the same time by two independent groups as comprising 14 exons and spanning approximately 40-50 kb (Nakashima et al.1994, Morris et al.1994). 
R-HSA-2206308	MPS IV - Morquio syndrome B	Defects in beta-galactosidase (GLB1; MIM:611458) can result in GM1 gangliosidosis (GM1; MIM:230500) (Nishimoto et al. 1991) (not described here), with several phenotypes indicating mental deterioration, as well as in mucopolysaccharidosis IVB, a characteristic mucopolysaccharidosis with no neurological symptoms (Callahan 1999).<br><br>Mucopolysaccharidosis IVB (MPS IVB, Morquio's syndrome B; MIM:253010) is a rare, autosomal recessive mucopolysaccharide storage disease characterized by intracellular accumulation of keratan sulfate (KS), skeletal dysplasia and corneal clouding. There is no central nervous system involvement, intelligence is normal and there is increased KS excretion in urine (Suzuki et al. "Beta-galactosidase deficiency (beta-galactosidosis): GM1 gangliosidosis and Morquio B disease", p3775-3809 in Stryer et al. 2001). MPSIVB is caused by a defect in betagalactosidase (GLB1), which normally cleaves terminal galactosyl residues from glycosaminoglycans, gangliosides and glycoproteins. The GLB1 gene spans 62.5 kb and contains 16 exons (Oshima et al.1988, Santamaria et al. 2007) and maps to chromosome 3p21.33 (Takano & Yamanouchi 1993).<br> 
R-HSA-2206280	MPS IX - Natowicz syndrome	Mucopolysaccharidosis type IX (MPS IX, Natowicz syndrome, Hyaluronidase deficiency, MIM:601492) is a rare lysosomal storage disease characterized by high hyaluronan (HA) concentration in the serum resulting from deficiency in hyaluronidase 1 (HYAL1, MIM:607071) which normally hydrolyses 1-4 linkages between N-acetylglucosamine (GlcNAc) and D-glucuronate (GlcA) residues. Symptoms of MPS IX are periodically painful soft tissue masses around the joints, acquired short stature and erosion of the hip joint, although joint movement and intelligence are normal (Natowicz et al. 1996, Triggs-Raine et al. 1999). 
R-HSA-2206285	MPS VI - Maroteaux-Lamy syndrome	Mucopolysaccharidosis type VI (MPS VI, Maroteaux-Lamy syndrome, polydystrophic dwarfism; MIM:253200) is an autosomal recessive lysosomal storage disorder caused by a deficiency in arylsulfatase B (ARSB, N-acetyl-galactosamine 4-sulfatase; MIM:611542). It is named after two French physicians, Pierre Maroteaux and Maurice Emil Joseph Lamy. Maroteaux first described this disorder as a novel dysostosis associated with increased urinary excretion of chondroitin sulfate (CS; Maroteaux et al. 1963). The gene encoding ARSB is mapped to chromosome 5q11-q13 (Fidzianska et al. 1984) and contains 8 exons spanning about 206 kb (Karangeorgos et al. 2007). Defective ARSB results in build up of dermatan sulfate (DS) and chondroitin sulfate (CS) in soft tissues causing compression and blockages in blood vessels, nerves, trachea, corneal clouding and disrupting normal bone development. Symptoms are similar to MPS I but with normal intelligence generally (Rapini et al. 2007, Valayannopoulos et al. 2010).
R-HSA-2206292	MPS VII - Sly syndrome	Mucopolysaccharidosis type VII (MPS VII, Sly syndrome, beta-glucuronidase deficiency; MIM:253220) is an autosomal recessive lysosomal storage disease characterized by a deficiency of the enzyme beta-glucuronidase (GUSB; MIM:611499) which would normally cleave glucuronide residues from dematan sulphate, keratan sulphate and chondroitin sulphate, resulting in build up of these GAGs in cells and tissues (Sly et al. 1973). The gene encoding GUSB is 21 kb long, contains 12 exons and gives rise to two different types of cDNAs, through an alternate splicing mechanism (Miller et al. 1990). It maps to 7q11.21-q11.22 (Speleman et al. 1996). The phenotype is highly variable, ranging from severe causing death, non-immune hydrops fetalis (Vervoort et al. 1996) to mild forms with survival into adulthood (Storch et al. 2003). Most patients with the intermediate phenotype show hepatomegaly, skeletal anomalies, coarse facies, and variable degrees of mental impairment (Shipley et al. 1993, Tomatsu et al. 2009).
R-HSA-72187	mRNA 3'-end processing	The 3' ends of eukaryotic mRNAs are generated by posttranscriptional processing of an extended primary transcript. For almost all RNAs, 3'-end processing consists of two steps: (i) the mRNA is first cleaved at a particular phosphodiester bond downstream of the coding sequence, (ii) the upstream fragment then receives a poly(A) tail of approximately 250 adenylate residues, whereas the downstream fragment is degraded. The two partial reactions are coupled so that reaction intermediates are usually undetectable. While 3' processing can be studied as an isolated event <i>in vitro</i>, it appears to be connected to transcription, splicing, and transcription termination <i>in vivo</i>.<p>The only known exception to the rule of cleavage followed by polyadenylation are the major histone mRNAs, which are cleaved but not polyadenylated.
R-HSA-72086	mRNA Capping	The 5'-ends of all eukaryotic pre-mRNAs studied thus far are converted to cap structures. The cap is thought to influence splicing of the first intron, and is bound by 'cap-binding' proteins, CBP80 and CBP20, in the nucleus. The cap is important for translation initiation, and it also interacts with the poly(A)terminus, via proteins, resulting in circularization of the mRNA to facilitate multiple rounds of translation. The cap is also important for mRNA stability, protecting it from 5' to 3' nucleases, and is required for mRNA export to the cytoplasm.<BR>The capping reaction usually occurs very rapidly on nascent transcripts; after the synthesis of only a few nucleotides by RNA polymerase II. The capping reaction involves the conversion of the 5'-end of the nascent transcript from a triphosphate to a diphosphate by a RNA 5'-triphosphatase, followed by the addition of a guanosine monophosphate by the mRNA guanylyltransferase, to form a 5'-5'-triphosphate linkage. This cap is then methylated by 2'-O-methyltransferases.<P>
R-HSA-429958	mRNA decay by 3' to 5' exoribonuclease	The degradation of mRNA from 3' to 5' occurs in two steps. First, the exosome exoribonuclease complex binds the 3' end of the oligoadenylated mRNA and hydrolyzes it from 3' to 5', yielding ribonucleotides having 5'-monophosphates, until a capped oligoribonucleotide remains. Second, the scavenging decapping enzyme DCPS hydrolyzes the 7-methylguanosine cap.
R-HSA-430039	mRNA decay by 5' to 3' exoribonuclease	Degradation of mRNA from 5' to 3' occurs in three steps. First, the mRNA is bound at its 3' end by the Lsm1-7 complex. The bound Lsm1-7 may prevent nucleases from accessing the 3' end. Second, the 7-methylguanosine cap of the mRNA is hydrolyzed by the DCP1-DCP2 complex. Third, the 5' end of the decapped mRNA is attacked by the XRN1 exoribonuclease which digests the remainder of the mRNA from 5' to 3'. These processes may be physically connected by PATL1, the homolog of yeast Pat1, which stably binds the Lsm1-7 complex and interacts with the DCP1-DCP2 decapping complex and the Ccr4-NOT deadenylation complex (Ozgur et al. 2010).
R-HSA-75072	mRNA Editing	After transcription, some RNA molecules are altered to contain bases not encoded in the genome. Most often this involves the editing or modification of one base to another, but in some organisms can involve the insertion or deletion of a base. Such editing events alter the coding properties of mRNA.<BR>RNA editing can be generally defined as the co- or post transcriptional modification of the primary sequence of RNA from that encoded in the genome through nucleotide deletion, insertion, or base modification mechanisms.<BR>There are two pathways of RNA editing: the substitution/conversion pathway and the insertion/deletion pathway. The insertion/deletion editing occurs in protozoans like Trypanosoma, Leishmania; in slime molds like Physarum spp., and in some viral categories like paramyxoviruses, Ebola virus etc. To date, the substitution/conversion pathway has been observed in human along with other mammals, Drosophila, and some plants. The RNA editing processes are known to create diversity in proteins involved in various pathways like lipid transport, metabolism etc. and may act as potential targets for therapeutic intervention (Smith et al., 1997).<BR>The reaction mechanisms of cytidine and adenosine deaminases is represented below. In both these reactions, NH3 is presumed to be released:<BR>
R-HSA-75064	mRNA Editing: A to I Conversion	In humans the deamination of adenosines to inosines is the most common editing event. It is particularly prevalent in the brain, where it leads to amino acid changes that affect the conductance of several ion channels. Inosines are recognized by the translation machinery as if they were guanosines.<BR>ADARs (Adenosine Deaminases Acting on RNA) modify pre-mRNA, acting as single peptides and recognize structural determinants in the RNA. To date 3 members of this deaminase family are known: ADAR 1, ADAR 2, and ADAR 3 that share a common modular domain structure. ADAR 1 and 2 contain a catalytic deaminase domain, a double-stranded RNA binding domain and exhibit RNA editing activity. ADAR1 activity is found in various mammalian tissues with the highest concentration in brain.<BR>An increasing number of mammalian genes have been found to undergo deamination by ADARs. Deamination by editing in pre-mRNAs encoding subunits of ionotropic glutamate receptors (GluRs) is another well studied example. An editing event at the Q/R site of the GluR2 (GluRB) subunit of AMPA receptors converts a Gln codon CAG to an Arg codon CIG rendering the heteromeric receptor impermeable to Ca 2+ ions. Another example is the editing of 5-HT2C subtype serotonin receptor mRNA resulting in receptor isoforms with reduced G-protein coupling efficiency (reviewed by Gerber and Keller, 2001).<BR>In mice, the editosomes with ADAR proteins require some cis-acting elements like an intronic 'editing-site complementary sequence (ECS)'. Although evolutionarily conserved, the actual role of ECS is not yet elucidated in humans. The editing complex can be generally represented as:<BR>
R-HSA-72200	mRNA Editing: C to U Conversion	The best characterized case of C to U editing is in the intestinal apolipoprotein B transcript, where the editing event creates a premature translation stop codon and consequently leads to a shorter form of the protein. In the liver, C to U editing is important in the expression of specific isoforms of the apolipoprotein B enzyme. ApoB mRNA editing is a posttranscriptional, nuclear process that can be initiated after splicing, at the time of polyadenylation and is completed by the time pre-mRNA matures fully (reviewed by Blanc and Davidson, 2003).<BR>This editing event is a simple hydrolytic cytidine deamination to uridine, and is carried out by the Apobec-1 enzyme, along with the Apobec-1 complementing factor, ACF. The editing of apo-B mRNA involves the site-specific deamination of (C6666 to U), which converts codon 2153 from a glutamine codon, CAA, to a premature stop codon, UAA. As ACF is distributed in a variety of tissues, and these genes contain multiple family members, it is possible that editing events in additional targets will be found.<BR>The cis-acting regulatory elements for C to U editing include: 22 nt editing site within ApoB mRNA, 5' tripartite motif with an enhancer element adjacent to the target cytidine, a spacer element and mooring sequence both 3' to the cytidine (reviewed by Smith et al., 1997).
R-HSA-72172	mRNA Splicing	The process in which excision of introns from the primary transcript of messenger RNA (mRNA) is followed by ligation of the two exon termini exposed by removal of each intron, is called mRNA splicing. Most of the mRNA is spliced by the major pathway, involving the U1, U2, U4, U5 and U6 snRNPs. A minor fraction, about 1 %, of the mRNAs are spliced via the U12 dependent pathway.
R-HSA-72163	mRNA Splicing - Major Pathway	The splicing of pre-mRNA occurs within a large, very dynamic complex, designated the 'spliceosome'. The 50-60S spliceosomes are estimated to be 40-60 nm in diameter, and have molecular weights in the range of 3-5 million kDa. Small nuclear RNAs (snRNAs) U1, U2, U4, U5, and U6, are some of the best characterized components of spliceosomes, and are known to play key roles not only in spliceosomal assembly, but also in the two catalytic steps of the splicing reaction. Over 150 proteins have been detected in spliceosomes, and only a subset of these has been characterized. The characterization, and the determination of the functions of the protein components of the spliceosome, is still work in progress.<p>During spliceosome assembly, the snRNAs and the spliceosomal proteins assemble on the pre-mRNA in a stepwise pathway. First the E complex forms, followed by complexes A and B; the C complex forms next and contains the products of the first step of the splicing reaction. Complexes called i and D form as a consequence of the second step of the splicing reaction, which contain the excised intron and the spliced exons, respectively.
R-HSA-72165	mRNA Splicing - Minor Pathway	The splicing of a subset of pre-mRNA introns occurs by a second pathway, designated the AT-AC or U12-dependent splicing pathway. AT-AC introns have highly conserved, non-canonical splice sites that are removed by the AT-AC spliceosome, which contains distinct snRNAs (U11, U12, U4atac, U6atac) that are structurally and functionally analogous to the major spliceosome. U5 snRNA as well as many of the protein factors appear to be conserved between the two spliceosomes.
R-HSA-1222449	Mtb iron assimilation by chelation	Uptake of iron in <i>Mtb</i>, especially when the bacterium is in the host, strongly depends on siderophores. Humans, through secretion of lactoferrin, maintain an iron concentration of 10^(-18) M within macrophages, and the bacterium has evolved the siderophores mycobactin T and exomycobactin T (formerly exochelin) to cope with this shortage. While nonpolar mycobactin T stays in the cell wall and only moves around in liquid droplets, polar exochelin is abundantly secreted. As it can bind iron with higher affinity than lactoferrin, it frequently scavenges iron ions from this molecule (Miethke & Marahiel 2007).
R-HSA-165159	mTOR signalling	Target of rapamycin (mTOR) is a highly-conserved serine/threonine kinase that regulates cell growth and division in response to energy levels, growth signals, and nutrients (Zoncu et al. 2011). Control of mTOR activity is critical for the cell since its dysregulation leads to cancer, metabolic disease, and diabetes (Laplante & Sabatini 2012). In cells, mTOR exists as two structurally distinct complexes termed mTOR complex 1 (mTORC1) and mTOR complex 2 (mTORC2), each one with specificity for different sets of effectors. mTORC1 couples energy and nutrient abundance to cell growth and proliferation by balancing anabolic (protein synthesis and nutrient storage) and catabolic (autophagy and utilization of energy stores) processes.
R-HSA-166208	mTORC1-mediated signalling	mTORC1 integrates four major signals  growth factors, energy status, oxygen and amino acids  to regulate many processes that are involved in the promotion of cell growth. Growth factors stimulate mTORC1 through the activation of the canonical insulin and Ras signaling pathways. The energy status of the cell is signaled to mTORC1 through AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK), a key sensor of intracellular energy status (Hardie 2007). Energy depletion (low ATP:ADP ratio) activates AMPK which phosphorylates TSC2, increasing its GAP activity towards Rheb which reduces mTORC1 activation (Inoki et al. 2003). AMPK can reduce mTORC1 activity by directly phosphorylating Raptor (Gwinn et al. 2008). Amino acids positively regulate mTORC1 (reviewed by Guertin & Sabatini 2007). In the presence of amino acids, Rag proteins bind Raptor to promote the relocalization of mTORC1 from the cytoplasm to lysosomal membranes (Puertollano 2014) where it is activated by Rheb (Saucedo et al. 2003, Stocker et al. 2003). Translocation of mTOR to the lysosome requires active Rag GTPases and a complex known as Ragulator, a pentameric protein complex that anchors the Rag GTPases to lysosomes (Sancak et al. 2008, 2010, Bar-Peled et al. 2012). Rag proteins function as heterodimers, consisting of GTP-bound RagA or RagB complexed with GDP-bound RagC or RagD. Amino acids may trigger the GTP loading of RagA/B, thereby promoting binding to raptor and assembly of an activated mTORC1 complex, though a recent study suggested that the activation of mTORC1 is not dependent on Rag GTP charging (Oshiro et al. 2014). The activity of Rheb is regulated by a complex consisting of tuberous sclerosis complex 1 (TSC1), TSC2, and TBC1 domain family member 7 (TBC1D7) (Huang et al. 2008, Dibble et al. 2012). This complex localizes to lysosomes and functions as a GTPase-activating protein (GAP) that inhibits the activity of Rheb (Menon et al. 2014, Demetriades et al. 2014). In the presence of growth factors or insulin, TSC releases its inhibitory activity on Rheb, thus allowing the activation of mTORC1.
R-HSA-2206281	Mucopolysaccharidoses	The mucopolysaccharidoses (MPS) are a group of rare, inherited lysosomal storage disorders caused by deficiencies of enzymes catalyzing the stepwise degradation of glycosaminoglycans (GAGs, originally called mucopolysaccharides) (Neufeld & Muenzer in Scriver et al. 2001). Catabolism of the GAGs dermatan sulfate, heparan sulfate, heparin, keratan sulfate, chondroitin sulfate or hyaluronan may be blocked at one or more steps, resulting in lysosomal accumulation of GAG fragments of varying size. Over time these collect in the cells, blood and connective tissues ultimately resulting in progressive irreversible cellular damage which affects appearance, physical abilities, organ and system function, vision, and usually mental development (Lehman et al. 2011, Ashworth et al. 2006). Life expectancy is also reduced. There are 11 known enzyme deficiencies that give rise to 7 distinct MPS. These disorders are biochemically characterized by elevated levels of partially or undegraded GAGs in lysosomes, blood, urine and cerebro-spinal fluid (Muenzer 2011, Coutinho et al. 2012). The MPS are part of the lysosomal storage disease family, a group of about 50 genetic disorders caused by deficient lysosomal proteins (Ballabio & Gieselmann 2009).
R-HSA-427601	Multifunctional anion exchangers	The human SLC26 gene family consists of eleven members which encode multifunctional anion exchangers.These exchangers are capable of transporting a variety of anions such as sulphate, bicarbonate, oxalate, hydroxyl, formate, iodide and chloride. SLC26 members can be grouped according to functional similiarities and three groups can be classified this way. Group 1 are selective sulphate transporters and include SLC26A1 and 2. Group 2 are Cl-/HCO3- exchangers and include SLC26A3, 4 and 6. Group 3 function as ion channels and include SLC26A7 and 9. 
R-HSA-390648	Muscarinic acetylcholine receptors	Muscarinic acetylcholine (mAChRs) receptors were so named because they are more sensitive to muscarine than to nicotine (Ishii M and Kurachi Y, 2006). Their counterparts are nicotinic acetylcholine receptors (nAChRs), ion channels receptors that are also important in the autonomic nervous system. Many drugs can manipulate these two distinct receptors by acting as selective agonists or antagonists. mAChRs bind to the bioamine acetylcholine, have a widespread tissue distribution and are involved in the control of numerous central and peripheral physiological responses, particularly voluntary muscle contraction. They are also major targets for drugs in human diseases such as Alzheimer's, Parkinson's and schizophrenia. This family of G-protein coupled receptors consists of five members designated M1-M5 and are sub-divided into two groups based on their primary coupling to G proteins. M2 and M4 receptors couple to Gi/o proteins and M1, M3 and M5 receptors couple to Gq/11 proteins (Caulfield MP and Birdsall NJ, 1998).
R-HSA-397014	Muscle contraction	In this module, the processes by which calcium binding triggers actin - myosin interactions and force generation in smooth and striated muscle tissues are annotated.
R-HSA-975871	MyD88 cascade initiated on plasma membrane	Mammalian myeloid differentiation factor 88 (MyD88) is Toll/interleukin (IL)-1 (TIR)-domain containing adapter protein which plays crucial role in TLR signaling. All TLRs, with only one exception of TLR3, can initiate downstream signaling trough MyD88. In the MyD88 - dependent pathway, once the adaptor is bound to TLR it leads to recruitment of IL1 receptor associated kinase family IRAK which is followed by activation of tumour necrosis factor receptor-associated factor 6 (TRAF6) . TRAF6 is an ubiquitin E3 ligase which in turn induces TGF-beta activating kinase 1 (TAK1) auto phosphorylation. Once activated TAK1 can ultimately mediate the induction of the transcription factor NF-kB or the mitogen-activated protein kinases (MAPK), such as JNK, p38 and ERK. This results in the translocation of the activated NF-kB and MAPKs to the nucleus and the initiation of appropriate gene transcription leading to the production of many proinflammatory cytokines and antimicrobial peptides.
R-HSA-5602498	MyD88 deficiency (TLR2/4)	Myeloid differentiation primary response (MyD88) is an adaptor protein that mediates intracellular signaling pathways evoked by all Toll-like receptors (TLRs) except for TLR3 and by several interleukin-1 receptors (IL-1Rs) (Medzhitov R et al. 1998). Upon ligand binding, TLRs hetero- or homodimerize and recruit MyD88 through their respective TIR domains. Then, MyD88 oligomerizes via its death domain (DD) and TIR domain and interacts with the interleukin-1 receptor-associated kinases (IRAKs) to form the Myddosome complex (MyD88:IRAK4:IRAK1/2) (Motshwene PG et al. 2009; Lin SC et al. 2010). The Myddosome complex transmits the signal leading to activation of transcription factors such as nuclear factor-kappaB (NFkB) and activator protein 1 (AP1).<p>Studies have identified patients with autosomal recessive (AR) form of MyD88 deficiency caused by homozygous or compound heterozygous mutations in MYD88 gene leading to abolished protein production (von Bernuth et al. 2008). AR MyD88 deficiency is a type of a primary immunodeficiency characterized by greater susceptibility to pyogenic bacteria (such as Streptococcus pneumoniae, Staphylococcus aureus or Pseudomonas aeruginosa) manifested in infancy and early childhood. Patients with MyD88 deficiency show delayed or weak signs of inflammation (Picard C et al. 2010; Picard C et al. 2011).<p>Functional assessment of MyD88 deficiency revealed that cytokine responses were impaired in patient-derived blood cells upon stimulation with the agonists of TLR2 and TLR4 (PAM2CSK4 and LPS respectively), although some were produced in response to LPS. (von Bernuth et al. 2008). NFkB luciferase reporter gene assays using human embryonic kidney 293 (HEK293T) cells showed that MyD88 variants, S34Y, E52del, E53X, L93P, R98C, and R196C, were compromised in their ability to enhance NFkB activation (Yamamoto T et al. 2014). The molecular basis for the observed functional effects (reported for selected mutations) probably faulty Myddosome formation due to impaired MyD88 oligomerization and/or interaction with IRAK4 (George J et al. 2011; Nagpal K et al. 2011; Yamamoto T et al. 2014).<p>While MyD88-deficiency might be expected to perturb MyD88?IRAK4 dependent TLR7 and TLR8 signaling events associated with the sensing viral infections, patients with MyD88 and IRAK4 deficiencies have so far not been reported to be susceptible to viral infection.
R-HSA-5602680	MyD88 deficiency (TLR5)	Myeloid differentiation primary response (MyD88) is an adaptor protein that mediates intracellular signaling pathways evoked by all Toll-like receptors (TLRs) (except for TLR3) and several interleukin-1 receptors (IL-1Rs) (Medzhitov R et al. 1998). Upon ligand binding, TLRs hetero- or homodimerize and recruit MyD88 through their respective TIR domains. Then, MyD88 oligomerizes via its death domain (DD) and TIR domain and interacts with the interleukin-1 receptor-associated kinases (IRAKs) to form the Myddosome complex (MyD88:IRAK4:IRAK1/2) (Motshwene PG et al. 2009; Lin SC et al. 2010). The Myddosome complex transmits the signal leading to activation of transcription factors such as nuclear factor-kappaB (NFkB) and activator protein 1 (AP1).<p>Studies have identified patients with autosomal recessive (AR) form of MyD88 deficiency caused by homozygous or compound heterozygous mutations in MYD88 gene leading to abolished protein production (von Bernuth et al. 2008). AR MyD88 deficiency is a type of a primary immunodeficiency characterized by greater susceptibility to pyogenic bacteria such as invasive pneumococcal disease manifested in infancy and early childhood. Patients with MyD88-deficiency show delayed or weak signs of inflammatory responses (Picard C et al. 2010; Picard C et al. 2011).<p>Functional assessment of MyD88 deficiency revealed that cytokine responses were abolished in patient-derived blood cells upon stimulation with bacterial flagellin, which is recognized by TLR5 (von Bernuth et al. 2008). An NFkB luciferase reporter gene assay using human embryonic kidney 293 (HEK293T) cells showed that MyD88 variants, S34Y, E52del, E53X, L93P, R98C, and R196C, were compromised in the ability to enhance NFkB activation (Yamamoto T et al. 2014). The molecular basis for the observed functional effects (reported for selected mutations) probably faulty Myddosome formation due to impaired MyD88 oligomerization and/or interaction with IRAK4 (George J et al. 2011; Nagpal K et al. 2011; Yamamoto T et al. 2014).<p>While MyD88 deficiency might be expected to perturb MyD88?IRAK4 dependent TLR7 and TLR8 signaling events associated with the sensing viral infections in the endosome, patients with MyD88 and IRAK4 deficiencies have so far not been reported to be susceptible to viral infection.
R-HSA-975155	MyD88 dependent cascade initiated on endosome	Upon binding of their ligands, TLR7/8 and TLR9 recruit a cytoplasmic adaptor MyD88 and IRAKs, downstream of which the signaling pathways are divided to induce either inflammatory cytokines or type I IFNs.
R-HSA-166166	MyD88-independent TLR3/TLR4 cascade 	MyD88-independent signaling pathway is shared by TLR3 and TLR4 cascades. TIR-domain-containing adapter-inducing interferon-beta (TRIF or TICAM1) is a key adapter molecule in transducing signals from TLR3 and TLR4 in a MyD88-independent manner (Yamamoto M et al. 2003a). TRIF is recruited to ligand-stimulated TLR3 or 4 complex via its TIR domain. TLR3 directly binds TRIF (Oshiumi H et al 2003). In contrast, TLR4-mediated signaling pathway requires two adapter molecules, TRAM (TRIF-related adapter molecule or TICAM2) and TRIF. TRAM(TICAM2) is thought to bridge between the activated TLR4 complex and TRIF (Yamamoto M et al. 2003b, Tanimura N et al. 2008, Kagan LC et al. 2008).<p>TRIF recruitment to TLR complex stimulates distinct pathways leading to production of type 1 interferons (IFNs), pro-inflammatory cytokines and induction of programmed cell death.
R-HSA-166058	MyD88:Mal cascade initiated on plasma membrane	The first known downstream component of TLR4 and TLR2 signaling is the adaptor MyD88. Another adapter MyD88-adaptor-like (Mal; also known as TIR-domain-containing adaptor protein or TIRAP) has also been described for TLR4 and TLR2 signaling. MyD88 comprises an N-terminal Death Domain (DD) and a C-terminal TIR, whereas Mal lacks the DD. The TIR homotypic interactions bring adapters into contact with the activated TLRs, whereas the DD modules recruit serine/threonine kinases such as interleukin-1-receptor-associated kinase (IRAK). Recruitment of these protein kinases is accompanied by phosphorylation, which in turn results in the interaction of IRAKs with TNF-receptor-associated factor 6 (TRAF6). The oligomerization of TRAF6 activates TAK1, a member of the MAP3-kinase family, and this leads to the activation of the IkB kinases. These kinases, in turn, phosphorylate IkB, leading to its proteolytic degradation and the translocation of NF-kB to the nucleus. Concomitantly, members of the activator protein-1 (AP-1) transcription factor family, Jun and Fos, are activated, and both AP-1 transcription factors and NF-kB are required for cytokine production, which in turn produces downstream inflammatory effects.
R-HSA-3785653	Myoclonic epilepsy of Lafora	Lafora disease is a progressive neurodegenerative disorder with onset typically late in childhood, characterized by seizures and progressive neurological deterioration and death within ten years of onset. Recessive mutations in EPM2A (laforin) and NHLRC1 (malin) have been identified as causes of the disease. The disease is classified here as one of glycogen storage as EPM2A (laforin) and NHLRC1 (malin) regulate normal glycogen turnover and defects in either protein are associated with the formation of Lafora bodies, accumulations of abnormal, insoluble glycogen molecules in tissues including brain, muscle, liver, and heart (Ramachandran et al. 2009; Roach et al. 2012). Consistent with a central role for glycogen accumulation in the disease, reduced (Turnbull et al. 2011) or absent (Pederson et al. 2013) glycogen synthase activity prevents Lafora Disease in mouse models.<p>Type 2A disease. EPM2A (laforin) associated with cytosolic glycogen granules, normally catalyzes the removal of the phosphate groups added rarely but consistently to growing glycogen molecules (Tagliabracci et al. 2011). Defects in this catalytic activity lead to the formation of phosphorylated glycogen molecules that are insoluble and that show abnormal branching patterns (Minassian et al. 1998, Serratosa et al. 1999, Tagliabracci et al. 2011).<p>Type 2B disease. NHLRC1 (malin) normally mediates polyubiquitination of EPM2A (laforin) and PPP1R3C (PTG). The two polyubiquitinated proteins are targeted for proteasome-mediated degradation, leaving a glycogen-glycogenin particle associated with glycogen synthase. In the absence of NHLRC1 activity, EPM2A and PPP1R3C proteins appear to persist, associated with the formation of abnormal, stable glycogen granules (Lafora bodies) (Chan et al. 2003; Gentry et al. 2005). In NHLRC1 knockout mice PPP1R3C levels are unchanged rather than increased, suggesting that NHLRC1 does not target PPP1R3C for degradation. However, EPM2A protein levels are increased in this knockout consistent with NHLRC1's proposed role (DePaoli-Roach et al. 2010).
R-HSA-525793	Myogenesis	Myogenesis, the formation of muscle tissue, is a complex process involving steps of cell proliferation mediated by growth factor signaling, cell differentiation, reorganization of cells to form myotubes, and cell fusion. Here, one regulatory feature of this process has been annotated, the signaling cascade initiated by CDO (cell-adhesion-molecule-related/downregulated by oncogenes) and associated co-receptors.
R-HSA-975577	N-Glycan antennae elongation	N-glycans are further modified after the commitment to Complex or Hybrid N-glycans. The exact structure of the network of metabolic reactions involved is complex and not yet validated experimentally. Here we will show a generic reaction for each of the genes known to be involved in N-Glycosylation.<br>For a better annotation of the reactions and genes involved in the synthesis of Complex and Hybrid N-glycans we recommend the GlycoGene Database (Ito H. et al, 2010) (http://riodb.ibase.aist.go.jp/rcmg/ggdb/textsearch.jsp) for annotations of genes, and the Consortium for Functional Genomics (http://riodb.ibase.aist.go.jp/rcmg/ggdb/textsearch.jsp) for annotation of Glycan structures and reactions. Moreover, a computationally inferred prediction for the structure of this network is available through the software GlycoVis (Hossler P. et. al. 2006).
R-HSA-975576	N-glycan antennae elongation in the medial/trans-Golgi	In the latter compartments of the distal Golgi the N-Glycan is further modified, leading to the wide range of N-Glycans observed in multicellular organisms. The first step of N-Glycan elongation in the Golgi is the addition of a GlcNAc residue on the alpha 1,3 branch by the enzyme MGAT1 (GlcNAc-TI), which commits the elongation pathway to Complex or Hybrid N-Glycans from Oligomannose N-Glycans. At this point, the pathway bifurcates again to generate Complex or Hybrid N-Glycans. The addition of a GlcNAc in the middle of the two arms of the N-Glycan, catalyzed by MGAT3 (GNT-III), inhibits the removal of the mannoses on the alpha1,3 branches by MAN2 and the addition of a GlcNAc by MGAT2 (GlcNAc-TII), and commits the pathway toward the synthesis of hybrid N-Glycans. Alternatively, the removal of these mannoses and the action of MGAT2 leads to the synthesis of complex N-Glycans (Kornfeld and Kornfeld 1985).<br>The exact structure of the network of reactions leading to Complex or Hybrid N-Glycans is still not completely described and validated experimentally. Here we will annotate only one generic reaction for each of the enzymes known to participate in this process. For a better annotation on the reactions and genes involved in the synthesis of Complex and Hybrid N-Glycans we recommend the GlycoGene Database (Ito H. et al, 2010) (http://riodb.ibase.aist.go.jp/rcmg/ggdb/textsearch.jsp) for annotations on genes, and the Consortium for Functional Genomics (http://riodb.ibase.aist.go.jp/rcmg/ggdb/textsearch.jsp) for annotation of Glycan structures and reactions. Moreover, a computationally inferred prediction on the structure of this network is available through the software GlycoVis (Hossler P. et. al. 2006).
R-HSA-964739	N-glycan trimming and elongation in the cis-Golgi	After the transport of the glycoprotein to the cis-Golgi, the pathway of N-glycosylation bifurcates. Some N-glycans can be moved to subsequent steps of the secretory pathway without further modifications, or alternatively, with the removal of a few mannoses (Oligo Mannoses pathway). In yeast and other unicellular species, a series of mannose residues are added (High Mannoses pathway). The presence of this modification is a major obstacle to the production of pharmaceutical drugs in yeast, where the HighMannose pathway must be inhibited or modified in order to avoid the presence of high mannose xenoglycans.<br>The first N-glycan modification step is the trimming of up to four mannoses by one of three mannosidase enzymes. Moreover, Glycoproteins that have not entered in the Calnexin/Calreticulin cycle or that have not had their glucose residues trimmed earlier in the ER, can enter the main pathway here due to the existence to an alternative route catalyzed by the enzyme Endomannosidase I (Schachter, 2000; Stanley et al, 2009)<br>
R-HSA-532668	N-glycan trimming in the ER and Calnexin/Calreticulin cycle	After being synthesized in the ER membrane the 14-sugars lipid-linked oligosaccharide is co-translationally transferred to an unfolded protein, as described in the previous steps. After this point the N-glycan is progressively trimmed of the three glucoses and some of the mannoses before the protein is transported to the cis-Golgi. The role of these trimming reactions is that the N-glycan attached to an unfolded glycoprotein in the ER assume the role of 'tags' that direct the interactions of the glycoprotein with different elements that mediate its folding. The removal of the two outer glucoses leads to an N-glycan with only one glucose, which is a signal for the binding of either one of two chaperone proteins, calnexin (CNX) and calreticulin (CRT). These chaperones provide an environment where the protein can fold more easily. The interaction with these proteins is not transient and is terminated by the trimming of the last remaining glucose, after which the glycoprotein is released from CNX or CRT and directed to the ER Quality Control compartment (ERQC) if it still has folding defects, or transported to the Golgi if the folding is correct. The involvement of N-glycans in the folding quality control of proteins in the ER explains why this form of glycosylation is so important, and why defects in the enzymes involved in these reactions are frequently associated with congenital diseases. However, there are many unknown points in this process, as it is known that even proteins without N-glycosylation sites can be folded properly (Caramelo JJ and Parodi AJ, 2008).
R-HSA-428808	Na+-dependent glucose transporters	Two gene families are responsible for glucose transport in humans. SLC2 (encoding GLUTs) and SLC5 (encoding SGLTs) families mediate glucose absorption in the small intestine, glucose reabsorption in the kidney, glucose uptake by the brain across the blood-brain barrier and glucose release by all cells in the body.<br><br>Na+-dependent glucose transporters (SGLTs) mediate secondary active glucose transport in the small intestine and kidney . They use the downhill Na+ gradient to transport glucose across intestinal and renal membranes. Three genes in the SLC5 family (SLC5A1, 2 and 9) encode proteins that transport glucose (and other substrates) with Na+ (Wright EM et al, 2007).
R-HSA-442660	Na+/Cl- dependent neurotransmitter transporters	The SLC6 gene family encodes proteins that mediate neurotransmitter uptake thus terminating a synaptic signal. The proteins mediate transport of GABA (gamma-aminobutyric acid), norepinephrine, dopamine, serotonin, glycine, taurine, L-proline, creatine and betaine. These transporters are mainly present in the CNS and PNS (Chen NH et al, 2004).
R-HSA-205025	NADE modulates death signalling	NADE protein (p75NTR-associated cell death executor) may induce cell death upon NGF binding, but not BDNF, NT3, or NT4/5 binding, to p75NTR. The NADE-dependent apoptosis is modulated by the 14-3-3-epsilon protein (Kimura MT et al, 2001).
R-HSA-389542	NADPH regeneration	The conversion of isocitrate to 2-oxoglutarate (alpha-ketoglutarate) with the concomitant synthesis of NADPH from NADP+ is thought to play a significant role in supplying NADPH for other reactions in both the cytosol and the peroxisome (Geisbrecht and Gould 1999).
R-HSA-375165	NCAM signaling for neurite out-growth	The neural cell adhesion molecule, NCAM, is a member of the immunoglobulin (Ig) superfamily and is involved in a variety of cellular processes of importance for the formation and maintenance of the nervous system. The role of NCAM in neural differentiation and synaptic plasticity is presumed to depend on the modulation of intracellular signal transduction cascades. NCAM based signaling complexes can initiate downstream intracellular signals by at least two mechanisms: (1) activation of FGFR and (2) formation of intracellular signaling complexes by direct interaction with cytoplasmic interaction partners such as Fyn and FAK. Tyrosine kinases Fyn and FAK interact with NCAM and undergo phosphorylation and this transiently activates the MAPK, ERK 1 and 2, cAMP response element binding protein (CREB) and transcription factors ELK and NFkB. CREB activates transcription of genes which are important for axonal growth, survival, and synaptic plasticity in neurons.<br><br>NCAM1 mediated intracellular signal transduction is represented in the figure below. The Ig domains in NCAM1 are represented in orange ovals and Fn domains in green squares. The tyrosine residues susceptible to phosphorylation are represented in red circles and their positions are numbered. Phosphorylation is represented by red arrows and dephosphorylation by yellow. Ig, Immunoglobulin domain; Fn, Fibronectin domain; Fyn, Proto-oncogene tyrosine-protein kinase Fyn; FAK, focal adhesion kinase; RPTPalpha, Receptor-type tyrosine-protein phosphatase; Grb2, Growth factor receptor-bound protein 2; SOS, Son of sevenless homolog; Raf, RAF proto-oncogene serine/threonine-protein kinase; MEK, MAPK and ERK kinase; ERK, Extracellular signal-regulated kinase; MSK1, Mitogen and stress activated protein kinase 1; CREB, Cyclic AMP-responsive element-binding protein; CRE, cAMP response elements.
R-HSA-419037	NCAM1 interactions	The neural cell adhesion molecule, NCAM1 is generally considered as a cell adhesion mediator, but it is also considered to be a signal transducing receptor molecule. NCAM1 is involved in multiple cis- and trans-homophilic interactions. It is also involved in several heterophilic interactions with a broad range of other molecules, thereby modulating diverse biological phenomena including cellular adhesion, migration, proliferation, differentiation, survival and synaptic plasticity.
R-HSA-420597	Nectin/Necl  trans heterodimerization	Nectins and Nectin-like molecules (Necls) also undergo trans-heterophilic interactions to interact with other nectin or Necl family members. Besides these trans interactions among nectins and nectin-like family members, trans-homophilic interactions have also been described between nectins or Necls with other immunoglobulin-superfamily members like CD96, CD226 and CRTAM (Sakisaka et al., 2007; Takai et al., 2008). It should be noted that some of these interactions might not exist in epithelial cell-cell contacts but may occur in other cell-cell adhesion systems.
R-HSA-164944	Nef and signal transduction	Nef interferes with cellular signal transduction pathways in a number of ways. Nef is associated with lipid rafts through its amino-terminal myristoylation and a proline-rich SH3-binding domain. These cholesterol-rich membrane microdomains appear to concentrate potent signaling mediators. Nef was found to complex with and activate serine/threonine protein kinase PAK-2, which may contribute to activation of infected cells. In vitro, HIV-infected T cells produce enhanced levels of interleukin-2 during activation. When expressed in macrophages, Nef intersects the CD40L signaling pathway inducing secretion of chemokines and other factors that attract resting T cells and promote their infection by HIV.
R-HSA-167590	Nef Mediated CD4 Down-regulation	The presence of Nef accelerates endocytosis and lysosomal degradation of the transmembrane glycoprotein CD4. CD4 has its own internalization motif, though this motif is normally concealed by CD4 interaction with Lck, a tyrosine kinase. Nef is known to disrupt this interaction and then facilitate a cascade of protein interactions that ultimately result in the degradation of internalized CD4 protein. The final set of protein interactions that direct Nef to the beta-subunit of the COPI coatomers are at this time unclear.<br><br>A benefit for the virus from CD4 down-modulation is abolition of interaction between the receptor and the Env protein of the budding virus, which likely increases HIV release from infected cell as well as infectivity of viral particles.
R-HSA-182218	Nef Mediated CD8 Down-regulation	Human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) Nef is a membrane-associated protein decreasing surface expression of CD4, CD28, and major histocompatibility complex class I on infected cells. Nef also strongly down-modulates surface expression of the beta-chain of the CD8alphabeta receptor by accelerated endocytosis, while CD8 alpha-chain expression is less affected. Mutational analysis of the cytoplasmic tail of the CD8 beta-chain indicates that an FMK amino acid motif is critical for the Nef-induced endocytosis. Although independent of CD4, endocytosis of the CD8 beta-chain is abrogated by the same mutations in Nef that affect CD4 down-regulation, suggesting common molecular interactions. The ability to down-regulate the human CD8 beta-chain was conserved in HIV-1, HIV-2, and simian immunodeficiency virus SIVmac239 Nef and required an intact AP-2 complex.
R-HSA-164939	Nef mediated downregulation of CD28 cell surface expression	Down-regulation of CD28 receptors involves a dileucine-based motif in the second disordered loop of Nef, which connects Nef to adaptor protein (AP) complex, which is a part of cellular endocytosis machinery. Nef induces accelerated endocytosis of CD28 via clathrin-coated pits followed by lysosomal degradation.
R-HSA-164940	Nef mediated downregulation of MHC class I complex cell surface expression	Down-regulation of MHC class I involves Nef-mediated connection in the endosomes between MHC-I's cytoplasmic tail and the phosphofurin acidic cluster sorting protein-1 (PACS-1)-dependent protein-sorting pathway. Down-regulation of MHC I protects HIV-infected cells from host CTL response.
R-HSA-164938	Nef-mediates down modulation of cell surface receptors by recruiting them to clathrin adapters	The maximal virulence of HIV-1 requires Nef, a virally encoded peripheral membrane protein. Nef binds to the adaptor protein (AP) complexes of coated vesicles, inducing an expansion of the endosomal compartment and altering the surface expression of cellular proteins including CD4 and class I major histocompatibility complex.<br> Nef affects the cell surface expression of several cellular proteins. It down-regulates CD4, CD8, CD28, and major histocompatibility complex class I and class II proteins, but upregulates the invariant chain of MHC II (CD74). To modulate cell surface receptor expression, Nef utilizes several strategies, linked to distinct regions within the Nef protein.<br>Since all these receptors are essential for proper functions of the immune system, modulation of their surface expression by Nef has profound effects on anti-HIV immune responses. Down-regulation of MHC I protects HIV-infected cells from host CTL response, whereas down-modulation of CD28 and CD4 probably limits the adhesion of a Nef-expressing T cell to the antigen-presenting cell, thus promoting the movement of HIV-infected cells into circulation and the spread of the virus.
R-HSA-5250941	Negative epigenetic regulation of rRNA expression	Transcription of rRNA genes is controlled by epigenetic activation and repression (reviewed in McStay and Grummt 2008, Goodfellow and Zomerdijk 2012, Grummt and Langst 2013). About half of the roughly 400 rRNA genes are expressed and these have the modifications of active chromatin: unmethylated DNA and acetylated histones. Repressed genes generally have methylated DNA and histone H3 methylated at lysine-9. Regulators of repression include the eNoSC complex, SIRT1, and the NoRC complex.
R-HSA-5674499	Negative feedback regulation of MAPK pathway	MAPK pathway activation is limited by a number of negative feedback loops established by MAPK-dependent phosphorylations. Known substrates of activated MAPK proteins that lie upstream in the RAF/MAPK pathway include SOS, RAF1, BRAF, and MAP2K1 (Buday et al, 1995; Dong et al, 1996; Dougherty et al, 2005; Sturm et al, 2010; Fritsche-Guenther et al, 2011; Rushworth et al, 2006; Brummer et al, 2003; Ritt et al, 2010; Catalanotti et al, 2009)
R-HSA-5654726	Negative regulation of FGFR1 signaling	Once activated, the FGFR signaling pathway is regulated by numerous negative feedback mechanisms. These include downregulation of receptors through CBL-mediated ubiquitination and endocytosis, ERK-mediated inhibition of FRS2-tyrosine phosphorylation and the attenuation of ERK signaling through the action of dual-specificity phosphatases, IL17RD/SEF, Sprouty and Spred proteins. A number of these inhibitors are themselves transcriptional targets of the activated FGFR pathway.
R-HSA-5654727	Negative regulation of FGFR2 signaling	Once activated, the FGFR signaling pathway is regulated by numerous negative feedback mechanisms. These include downregulation of receptors through CBL-mediated ubiquitination and endocytosis, ERK-mediated inhibition of FRS2-tyrosine phosphorylation and the attenuation of ERK signaling through the action of dual-specificity phosphatases, IL17RD/SEF, Sprouty and Spred proteins. A number of these inhibitors are themselves transcriptional targets of the activated FGFR pathway.
R-HSA-5654732	Negative regulation of FGFR3 signaling	Once activated, the FGFR signaling pathway is regulated by numerous negative feedback mechanisms. These include downregulation of receptors through CBL-mediated ubiquitination and endocytosis, ERK-mediated inhibition of FRS2-tyrosine phosphorylation and the attenuation of ERK signaling through the action of dual-specificity phosphatases, IL17RD/SEF, Sprouty and Spred proteins. A number of these inhibitors are themselves transcriptional targets of the activated FGFR pathway.
R-HSA-5654733	Negative regulation of FGFR4 signaling	Once activated, the FGFR signaling pathway is regulated by numerous negative feedback mechanisms. These include downregulation of receptors through CBL-mediated ubiquitination and endocytosis, ERK-mediated inhibition of FRS2-tyrosine phosphorylation and the attenuation of ERK signaling through the action of dual-specificity phosphatases, IL17RD/SEF, Sprouty and Spred proteins. A number of these inhibitors are themselves transcriptional targets of the activated FGFR pathway.
R-HSA-5675221	Negative regulation of MAPK pathway	The duration and extent of activated MAPK signaling is regulated at many levels through mechanisms that include phosphorylation and dephosphorylation, changes to protein interacting partners and subcellular localization (reviewed in Matallanas et al, 2011). <br><br>Activated RAF proteins are subject to MAPK-dependent phosphorylation that promotes the subsequent dephosphorylation of the activation loop and NtA region, terminating RAF kinase activity. This dephosphorylation, catalyzed by PP2A and PP5, primes the RAF proteins for PKA or AKT-mediated phosphorylation of residues S259 and S621, restoring the 14-3-3 binding sites and returning the RAF proteins to the inactive state (von Kriegsheim et al, 2006; Dougherty et al, 2005; reviewed in Matallanas et al, 2011). The phosphorylated RAF1 NtA is also subject to additional regulation through binding to the PEBP1 protein, which promotes its dissociation from MAP2K substrates (Shin et al, 2009). <br><br>Activated MAPK proteins also phosphorylate T292 of MAP2K1; this phosphorylation limits the activity of MAP2K1, and indirectly affects MAP2K2 activity through by modulating the activity of the MAP2K heterodimer (Catalanotti et al, 2009; reviewed in Matallanas et al, 2011).<br><br>Dephosphorylation of MAPKs by the dual specificity MAPK phosphatases (DUSPs) plays a key role in limiting the extent of pathway activation (Owens et al, 2007; reviewed in Roskoski, 2012b). Class I DUSPs are localized in the nucleus and are induced by activation of the MAPK pathway, establishing a negative feedback loop, while class II DUSPs dephosphorylate cytoplasmic MAPKs (reviewed in Rososki, 2012b).<br>MAPK signaling is also regulated by the RAS GAP-mediated stimulation of intrinsic RAS GTPase activity which returns RAS to the inactive, GDP bound state (reviewed in King et al, 2013).
R-HSA-5368598	Negative regulation of TCF-dependent signaling by DVL-interacting proteins	DVL is a central component of WNT signaling that plays roles in both canonical and non-canonical pathways (reviewed in Gao and Chen, 2010). In the canonical pathway, DVL recruits AXIN from the destruction complex upon WNT stimulation, allowing cytosolic beta-catenin to accumulate (reviewed in MacDonald et al, 2009). DVL activity is regulated by phosphorylation as well as by regulated proteasomal or lysosomal degradation (reviewed in Gao and Chen, 2010). In addition, DVL activity can be regulated by interaction with other proteins; both CXXC4 and CCDC88C were identified as negative regulators of WNT signaling that interact directly with DVL, although the role of these proteins in limiting WNT signaling remain to be fully worked out (Hino et al, 2001; Oshita et al, 2003; Ekici et al, 2010; Ishida-Takagishi et al, 2012).
R-HSA-3772470	Negative regulation of TCF-dependent signaling by WNT ligand antagonists	Several unrelated families of secreted proteins antagonize WNT signaling. Secreted frizzled-related proteins (sFRPs) have a cysteine rich domain (CRD) that is also found in FZD and ROR receptors, while WNT inhibitory factor (WIF) proteins contain a WIF domain also present in the WNT-receptor RYK. Both these classes of secreted WNT antagonists inhibit signaling by binding to WNTs and preventing their interaction with the FZD receptors. sFRPs may also able to bind the receptors, blocking ligand binding (Bafico et al, 1999; reviewed in Kawano and Kypta, 2003). The interaction of WIF and sFRPs with WNT ligand may also play a role in regulating WNT diffusion and gradient formation (reviewed in Boloventa et al, 2008).<br><br>Dickkopf (DKK) and Sclerostin (SOST) family members, in contrast, antagonize WNT signaling by binding to LRP5/6. There are four DKK family members in vertebrates; the closely related DKK1, 2 and 4 proteins have been shown to have roles in WNT signaling, while the more divergent DKK3 appears not to (Glinka et al, 1998; Fedi et al, 1999; Mao et al, 2001; Semenov et al, 2001; reviewed in Niehrs, 2006). Secreted DKK proteins bind to LRP6 in conjunction with the single-pass transmembrane proteins Kremen 1 and 2, and this interaction is thought to disrupt the WNT-induced FZD-LRP5/6 complex. In some cases, DKK2 has also been shown to function as a WNT agonist (reviewed in N (reviewed in Niehrs, 2006). <br>Like DKK proteins, SOST binds LRP5/6 and disrupts WNT-dependent receptor activation (Semenov et al, 2005).
R-HSA-199418	Negative regulation of the PI3K/AKT network	The PI3K/AKT network is negatively regulated by phosphatases that dephosphorylate PIP3, thus hampering AKT activation.
R-HSA-936440	Negative regulators of RIG-I/MDA5 signaling	As with other cytokine systems, production of type I IFN is a transient process, and can be hazardous to the host if unregulated, resulting in chronic cellular toxicity or inflammatory and autoimmune diseases. RIG-I-mediated production of IFN can, in turn, increase the transcription of RIG-I itself, thus setting into motion an IFN amplification loop, which if left unchecked, could become deleterious to the host. This module mainly focuses on the endogenous negative regulation of the RIG-I-like receptor (RLR) family proteins RIG-I and MDA5.
R-HSA-168333	NEP/NS2 Interacts with the Cellular Export Machinery	The viral RNP complex is exported from the nucleus via the host cell CRM1 export pathway (Fukuda, 1997; Neumann, 2000; reviewed in Buolo, 2006). The vRNP complex does not interact directly with CRM1 to form an export complex. Rather, an additional viral protein, nuclear export protein (NEP/NS2), acts as an adaptor, binding the viral matrix M1 protein and CRM1, thus linking the viral RNP with CRM1 (Martin, 1991; O'Neill, 1998; Neumann, 2000; Akarsu, 2003). The CRM1/exportin-1 complex recruits additional host cell proteins, and traverses the nuclear pore into the cytosol.
R-HSA-373753	Nephrin interactions	Nephrin is a member of the Super-IgG-Molecule family and is most prominently expressed in kidney podocytes. It is a major if not the most important structural component of the slit diaphragm, a modified adherens junction in between these cells. Nephrin is composed of an extracellular domain with eight distal IgG like domains and one proximal fibronectin type III domain, a transmembrane domain and a short intracellular domain. Nephrin molecules show both homophilic and heterophilic interactions. Among heterophilic interaction partners slit diaphragm proteins such as NEPH1, NEPH2 and NEPH3 were shown to stabilize the slit diaphragm structure. Intracellularly Podocin, CD2 associated protein (CD2AP) and adherins junction associated proteins like IQGAP, MAGI, CASK and spectrins were all shown to interact with nephrin. Hence nephrin seems to play a major role in organizing the molecular structure of the slit diaphragm itself and via its binding partners links it to the actin cytoskeleton. Nephrin does not only fulfill static properties within the slit diaphragm but by tyrosine phosphorylation of its cytoplasmic tail by the Src kinase Fyn it initiates the PI3K AKT signaling cascade which seems to promote antiapoptotic signals.
R-HSA-418886	Netrin mediated repulsion signals	Unc5 netrin receptors mediate repellent responses to netrin. Four Unc5 members have been found in humans: Unc5A, B, C and D. Different studies have suggested that long-range repulsion to netrin requires the cooperation of Unc5 and DCC, but that Unc5 without DCC is sufficient for short-range repulsion. The binding of netrin to Unc5 triggers the phosphorylation of Unc5 in its ZU-5 domain. Several proteins have been proposed to interact with Unc5 family members in mediating a repellent response, including tyrosine phosphatase Shp2, the F-actin anti-capping protein Mena, and ankyrin.
R-HSA-373752	Netrin-1 signaling	Netrins are secreted proteins that play a crucial role in neuronal migration and in axon guidance during the development of the nervous system. To date, several Netrins have been described in mouse and humans: Netrin-1, -3/NTL2, -4/h and G-Netrins. Netrin-1 is the most studied member of the family and has been shown to play a crucial role in neuronal navigation during nervous system development mainly through its interaction with its receptors DCC and UNC5. Members of the Deleted in colorectal cancer (DCC) family- which includes DCC and Neogenin in vertebrates- mediate netrin-induced axon attraction, whereas the C. elegans UNC5 receptor and its four vertebrate homologs Unc5a-Unc5d mediate repulsion.
R-HSA-447043	Neurofascin interactions	Neurofascin is an L1 family immunoglobulin cell adhesion molecule involved in axon subcellular targeting and synapse formation during neural development. There are a range of different isoforms identified in Neurofascin of which two of them are well studied the 186kDa commonly referred to as neuronal form and is present in node of Ranvier neurons and the 155kDa form known as a glial form present in schwann cells.<br>Neurofascin colocalizes with NrCAM and ankyrinG at the nodes of Ranvier. Neurofascin participates in transheterophilic adhesion with NrCAM and stimulates neurite outgrowth in chicken tectal neurons. The last few amino acids of neurofascin form the PDZ class I binding motif (SLA) and through these last few amino acids it associates with syntenin-1.
R-HSA-112316	Neuronal System	The human brain contains at least 100 billion neurons, each with the ability to influence many other cells. Clearly, highly sophisticated and efficient mechanisms are needed to enable communication among this astronomical number of elements. This communication occurs across synapses, the functional connection between neurons. Synapses can be divided into two general classes: electrical synapses and chemical synapses. Electrical synapses permit direct, passive flow of electrical current from one neuron to another. The current flows through gap junctions, specialized membrane channels that connect the two cells. Chemical synapses enable cell-to-cell communication using neurotransmitter release. Neurotransmitters are chemical agents released by presynaptic neurons that trigger a secondary current flow in postsynaptic neurons by activating specific receptor molecules. Neurotransmitter secretion is triggered by the influx of Ca2+ through voltage-gated channels, which gives rise to a transient increase in Ca2+ concentration within the presynaptic terminal. The rise in Ca2+ concentration causes synaptic vesicles (the presynaptic organelles that store neurotransmitters) to fuse with the presynaptic plasma membrane and release their contents into the space between the pre- and postsynaptic cells. 
R-HSA-194306	Neurophilin interactions with VEGF and VEGFR	The plasma membrane-associated Neuropilin receptors NRP-1 and -2 bind some of the VEGF proteins and associate with VEGF receptor proteins. NRP-1 binds VEGF-A165, -B, and PLGF-2; NRP-2 also binds VEGF-A165 and PLGF-2, as well as VEGF-A145 and -C. The Neurolipin receptors appear to act as cofactors for the VEGF receptors, increasing their affinities for specific VEGF ligands, although the importance of this function in vivo remains unclear (Neufeld et al. 2002). Detailed annotation of NRP interactions with VEGF proteins will be covered in future releases.
R-HSA-168799	Neurotoxicity of clostridium toxins	Clostridial neurotoxins, when taken up by human neurons, block synaptic transmission by cleaving proteins required for the fusion of synaptic vesicles with the plasma membrane. They are remarkably efficient so that very small doses cause paralysis of an affected person (Lalli et al. 2003; Turton et al. 2002). All characterized clostridial neurotoxins are synthesized as products of chromosomal, plasmid or prophage-borne bacterial genes. The nascent toxin may be cleaved into light (LC) and heavy (HC) chain moieties that remain attached by noncovalent interactions and a disulfide bond (Turton et al. 2002).<p>Strains of Clostridium botulinum produce seven serologically distinct toxins, BoNT/A, B, C, D, E, F, and G. An eighth toxin, BoNT/H has recently been identified (Barash & Arnon 2014) but its molecular properties have not yet been described. Human poisoning most commonly result from ingestion of toxin contaminated food. More rarely, it is due to wound infection or clostridial colonization of the gut of an infant whose own gut flora have not yet developed or of an older individual whose flora have been suppressed. While all seven characterized toxins can cleave human target proteins, three, BoNT/A, B, and E, are most commonly associated with human disease (Hatheway 1995; Sakaguchi 1982). BoNT/F is also able to cause human botulism.<p>Once ingested, the botulinum toxin must be taken up from the gut lumen into the circulation, a process mediated by four accessory proteins. These proteins form a complex that mediates transcytosis of the toxin molecule across the gut epithelium, allowing its entry into the circulation. The accessory proteins produced by different C. botulinum strains differ in their affinities for polarized epithelia of different species (e.g., human versus canine), and may thus be a key factor in human susceptibility to the toxins of strains A, B, and E and resistance to the others (Simpson 2004).<p>Clostridium tetani produces TeNT toxin. Human poisoning is the result of toxin secretion by bacteria growing in an infected wound and the toxin is released directly into the circulation.<p>Circulating clostridial toxins are taken up by neurons at neuromuscular junctions. They bind to specific gangliosides (BoNT/C, TeNT) or to both gangliosides and synaptic vesicle proteins (BoNT/A, B, D G) exposed on the neuronal plasma membrane during vesicle exocytosis (Montal 2010). All seven characterized forms of BoNT are thought to be taken up into synaptic vesicles as these re-form at the neuromuscular junction. These vesicles remain close to the site of uptake and are rapidly re-loaded with neurotransmitter and acidified (Sudhoff 2004). TeNT, in contrast, is taken up into clathrin coated vesicles that reach the neuron cell body by retrograde transport and then possibly other neurons before undergoing acidification. Vesicle acidification causes a conformational change in the toxin, allowing its HC part to function as a channel through which its LC part is extruded into the neuronal cytosol. The HC - LC disulfide bond is cleaved and the cytosolic LC functions as a zinc metalloprotease to cleave specific bonds in proteins on the cytosolic faces of synaptic vesicles and plasma membranes that normally mediate exocytosis (Lalli et al. 2003; Montal 2010).
R-HSA-112311	Neurotransmitter Clearance In The Synaptic Cleft	Neurotransmitter released in the synaptic cleft binds to specific receptors on the post-synaptic cell and the excess of the neurotransmitter is cleared to prevent over activation of the post-synaptic cell. The neurotransmitter is cleared by either re-uptake by the pre-synaptic neuron, diffusion in the perisynaptic area, uptake by astrocytes surrounding the synaptic cleft or enzymatic degradation of the neurotransmitter.<BR>This topic will be annotated in a future release.
R-HSA-112314	Neurotransmitter Receptor Binding And Downstream Transmission In The  Postsynaptic Cell	The neurotransmitter in the synaptic cleft released by the pre-synaptic neuron binds specific receptors located on the post-synaptic terminal. These receptors are either ion channels or G protein coupled receptors that function to transmit the signals from the post-synaptic membrane to the cell body.
R-HSA-112310	Neurotransmitter Release Cycle	Neurotransmitter is stored in the synaptic vesicle in the pre-synaptic terminal prior to its release in the synaptic cleft upon depolarization of the pre-synaptic membrane. The release of the neurotransmitter is a multi-step process that is controlled by electrical signals passing through the axons in form of action potential. Neurotransmitters include glutamate, acetylcholine, nor-epinephrine, dopamine and seratonin. Each of the neurotransmitter cycle is independently described.
R-HSA-112313	Neurotransmitter uptake and Metabolism In Glial Cells	Neuotransmitter uptake by astrocytes is mediated by specific transporter located on the astrocytic membrane. The imported neurotransmitter in the astrocytes is metabolized and transported back to the neuron via specialized transporters.
R-HSA-933543	NF-kB activation through FADD/RIP-1 pathway mediated by caspase-8 and -10	Fas-AssociatedDeathDomain (FADD) and receptor interacting protein 1 (RIP1) are death domain containing molecules that interact with the C-terminal portion of IPS-1 and induce NF-kB through interaction and activation of initiator caspases (caspase-8 and -10). Caspases are usually involved in apoptosis and inflammation but they also exhibit nonapoptotic functions. These nonapoptotic caspase functions involve prodomain-mediated activation of NF-kB. Processed caspases (caspase-8/10) encoding the DED (death effector domain) strongly activate NF-kB. The exact mechanism by which caspases mediate NF-kB activation is unclear, but the prodomains of caspase-8/10 may act as a scaffolding and allow the recruitment of the IKK complex in association with other signaling molecules.
R-HSA-209560	NF-kB is activated and signals survival	Upon activation in response to NGF, NF-kB moves to the nucleus, where it turns on genes that promote survival, and triggers the expression of HES1/5 to modulate dendritic growth.
R-HSA-205017	NFG and proNGF binds to p75NTR	When the co-receptor sortilin is present at the cell surface, proNGF preferentially interacts with a p75NTR:sortilin complex. Thus, proNGF, which does not bind TRKA, discriminates between TRKA and p75NTR, in cells that express both receptors. The same is true for proBDNF. Pro-neurotrophin binding to p75NTR:sortilin activates an apoptotic cascade, which may be involved in cell death after injury, and in neurodegenerative diseases such as Alzheimer's dementia.
R-HSA-167060	NGF processing	All neurotrophins (NTs) are generated as pre-pro-neurotrophin precursors. The signal peptide is cleaved off as NT is associated with the endoplasmic reticulum (ER). The resulting pro-NT can form a homodimer spontaneously which then transits to the Golgi apparatus and then onto the trans-Golgi network (TGN). Resident protein convertases (PCs) can cleave off the pro-sequence and mature NT is is targeted to constitutively released vesicles. The pro-NT form can also be released to the extracellular region.
R-HSA-187037	NGF signalling via TRKA from the plasma membrane	Trk receptors signal from the plasma membrane and from intracellular membranes, particularly from early endosomes. Signalling from the plasma membrane is fast but transient; signalling from endosomes is slower but long lasting. Signalling from the plasma membrane is annotated here. TRK signalling leads to proliferation in some cell types and neuronal differentiation in others. Proliferation is the likely outcome of short term signalling, as observed following stimulation of EGFR (EGF receptor). Long term signalling via TRK receptors, instead, was clearly shown to be required for neuronal differentiation in response to neurotrophins.
R-HSA-187024	NGF-independant TRKA activation	TRK receptors can also be activated by at least two G-protein-coupled receptors (GPCR), the adenosine A2a receptor and the PACAP type I receptor, without involvement of neurotrophins. Activity of both receptors is mediated by G proteins that activate adenyl cyclase. How this leads to TRKA activation has not been fully elucidated, although a SRC-family tyrosine kinase and intracellular Ca2+ appear to play a role. TRKA activation through GPCRs occurs with slow kinetics (over 1 hr adenosine or PACAP treatment is required) in an intracellular location (probably the Golgi apparatus), and requires transcriptional and protein synthesis events that may influence the processing and activation of the receptors. GPCR-mediated transactivation of TRK receptors causes the preferential activation of AKT versus ERKs. This leads to a cell survival response.
R-HSA-157052	NICD traffics to nucleus	NICD translocates to the nucleus and assembles into a ternary complex with the CSL (human RBPJ i.e. CBF1/ fly Suppressor of Hairless/ worm Lag1) DNA-binding protein and the Mastermind co-activator. This complex activates the transcription of downstream gene targets like HES (Hairy/Enhancer of Split) and HES-related (HRT, also named CHF, HEY, HESR, gridlock) genes. 
R-HSA-197264	Nicotinamide salvaging	Nicotinamide (NAM) levels are modulated by the action of three enzymes involved in nicotinamide salvaging. They are nicotinamide deaminase, nicotinamide phosphoribosyltransferase and nicotinate phosphoribosyltransferase. These enzymes are poorly characterized in humans, depsite their importance in NAM utilization (Magni et al. 2004). Although not a salvage reaction, NAM levels can also be regulated by nicotinamide N-methyltransferase (NNMT), a potential regulator of diet-induced obesity (Kraus et al. 2014).
R-HSA-196807	Nicotinate metabolism	Nicotinate (niacin) and nicotinamide are precursors of the coenzymes nicotinamide-adenine dinucleotide (NAD+) and nicotinamide-adenine dinucleotide phosphate (NADP+). When NAD+ and NADP+ are interchanged in a reaction with their reduced forms, NADH and NADPH respectively, they are important cofactors in several hundred redox reactions. Nicotinate is synthesized from 2-amino-3-carboxymuconate semialdehyde, an intermediate in the catabolism of the essential amino acid tryptophan.
R-HSA-5676590	NIK-->noncanonical NF-kB signaling	In addition to the activation of canonical NF-kB subunits, activation of SYK pathway by Dectin-1 leads to the induction of the non-canonical NF-kB pathway, which mediates the nuclear translocation of RELB-p52 dimers through the successive activation of NF-kB-inducing kinase (NIK) and IkB kinase-alpha (IKKa) (Geijtenbeek& Gringhuis2009, Gringhuis et al. 2009). Noncanonical activity tends to build more slowly and remain sustained several hours longer than does the activation of canonical NF-kB. The noncanonical NF-kB pathway is characterized by the post-translational processing of NFKB2 (Nuclear factor NF-kappa-B) p100 subunit to the mature p52 subunit. This subsequently leads to nuclear translocation of p52:RELB (Transcription factor RelB) complexes to induce cytokine expression of some genes (C-C motif chemokine 17 (CCL17) and CCL22) and transcriptional repression of others (IL12B) (Gringhuis et al. 2009, Geijtenbeek & Gringhuis 2009, Plato et al. 2013). 
R-HSA-392154	Nitric oxide stimulates guanylate cyclase	Nitric Oxide (NO) inhibits smooth muscle cell proliferation and migration, oxidation of low-density lipoproteins, and platelet aggregation and adhesion. It can stimulate vasodilatation of the endothelium, disaggregation of preformed platelet aggregates and inhibits activated platelet recruitment to the aggregate. NO is synthesized from L-arginine by a family of isoformic enzymes known as nitric oxide synthase (NOS). Three isoforms, namely endothelial, neuronal, and inducible NOS (eNOS, nNOS, and iNOS, respectively), have been identified. The eNOS isoform is found in the endothelium and platelets. NO regulation of cyclic guanosine-3,5-monophosphate (cGMP), via activation of soluble guanylate cyclase, is the principal mechanism of negative control over platelet activity. Defects in this control mechanism have been associated with platelet hyperaggregability and associated thrombosis.
R-HSA-168638	NOD1/2 Signaling Pathway	NOD1 is ubiquitously expressed, while NOD2 expression is restricted to monocytes, macrophages, dendritic cells, and intestinal Paneth cells (Inohara et al. 2005). NOD1 and NOD2 activation induces transcription of immune response genes, predominantly mediated by the proinflammatory transcriptional factor NFkappaB but also by AP-1 and Elk-1 (Inohara et al. 2005). NFkappaB translocates to the nucleus following release from IkappaB proteins. NOD1 and NOD2 signaling involves an interaction between their caspase-recruitment domain (CARD) and the CARD of the kinase RIPK2 (RIP2/RICK). This leads to the activation of the NFkappaB pathway and MAPK pathways (Windheim et al. 2007).<br>Activated NODs oligomerize via their NACHT domains, inducing physical proximity of RIP2 proteins that is believed to trigger their K63-linked polyubiquitination, facilitating recruitment of the TAK1 complex. RIP2 also recruits NEMO, bringing the TAK1 and IKK complexes into proximity, leading to NF-kappaB activation and activation of MAPK signaling. Recent studies have demonstrated that K63-linked regulatory ubiquitination of RIP2 is essential for the recruitment of TAK1 (Hasegawa et al. 2008, Hitosumatsu et al. 2008). As observed for toll-like receptor (TLR) signaling, ubiquitination can be removed by the deubiquitinating enzyme A20, thereby dampening NOD1/NOD2-induced NF-kappaB activation. NOD1 and NOD2 both induce K63-linked ubiquitination of RIP2, but NOD2-signaling appears to preferentially utilize the E3 ligase TRAF6, while TRAF2 and TRAF5 were shown to be important for NOD1-mediated signaling. In both cases, activation of NF-kappaB results in the upregulated transcription and production of inflammatory mediators.
R-HSA-3000171	Non-integrin membrane-ECM interactions	Several non-integrin membrane proteins interact with extracellular matrix proteins. Transmembrane proteoglycans may associate with integrins and growth factor receptors to influence their function, or they can signal independently, often influencing the actin cytoskeleton. 
R-HSA-5693571	Nonhomologous End-Joining (NHEJ)	The nonhomologous end joining (NHEJ) pathway is initiated in response to the formation of DNA double-strand breaks (DSBs) induced by DNA-damaging agents, such as ionizing radiation. DNA DSBs are recognized by the MRN complex (MRE11A:RAD50:NBN), leading to ATM activation and ATM-dependent recruitment of a number of DNA damage checkpoint and repair proteins to DNA DSB sites (Lee and Paull 2005). The ATM phosphorylated MRN complex, MDC1 and H2AFX-containing nucleosomes (gamma-H2AX) serve as scaffolds for the formation of nuclear foci known as ionizing radiation induced foci (IRIF) (Gatei et al. 2000, Paull et al. 2000, Stewart et al. 2003, Stucki et al. 2005). Ultimately, both BRCA1:BARD1 heterodimers and TP53BP1 (53BP1) are recruited to IRIF (Wang et al. 2007, Pei et al. 2011, Mallette et al. 2012), which is necessary for ATM-mediated CHEK2 activation (Wang et al. 2002, Wilson et al. 2008). In G1 cells, TP53BP1 promotes NHEJ by recruiting RIF1 and PAX1IP, which displaces BRCA1:BARD1 and associated proteins from the DNA DSB site and prevents resection of DNA DSBs needed for homologous recombination repair (HRR) (Escribano-Diaz et al. 2013, Zimmermann et al. 2013, Callen et al. 2013). TP53BP1 also plays an important role in ATM-mediated phosphorylation of DCLRE1C (ARTEMIS) (Riballo et al. 2004, Wang et al. 2014). Ku70:Ku80 heterodimer (also known as the Ku complex or XRCC5:XRCC6) binds DNA DSB ends, competing away the MRN complex and preventing MRN-mediated resection of DNA DSB ends (Walker et al. 2001, Sun et al. 2012). The catalytic subunit of the DNA-dependent protein kinase (DNA-PKcs, PRKDC) is then recruited to DNA-bound Ku to form the DNA-PK holoenzyme. Two DNA-PK complexes, one at each side of the break, bring DNA DSB ends together, joining them in a synaptic complex (Gottlieb 1993, Yoo and Dynan 2000). DNA-PK complex recruits DCLRE1C (ARTEMIS) to DNA DSB ends (Ma et al. 2002). PRKDC-mediated phosphorylation of DCLRE1C, as well as PRKDC autophosphorylation, enables DCLRE1C to trim 3'- and 5'-overhangs at DNA DSBs, preparing them for ligation (Ma et al. 2002, Ma et al. 2005, Niewolik et al. 2006). The binding of inositol phosphate may additionally stimulate the catalytic activity of PRKDC (Hanakahi et al. 2000). Other factors, such as polynucleotide kinase (PNK), TDP1 or TDP2 may remove unligatable damaged nucleotides from 5'- and 3'-ends of the DSB, converting them to ligatable substrates (Inamdar et al. 2002, Gomez-Herreros et al. 2013). DNA ligase 4 (LIG4) in complex with XRCC4 (XRCC4:LIG4) is recruited to ligatable DNA DSB ends together with the XLF (NHEJ1) homodimer and DNA polymerases mu (POLM) and/or lambda (POLL) (McElhinny et al. 2000, Hsu et al. 2002, Malu et al. 2002, Ahnesorg et al. 2006, Mahajan et al. 2002, Lee et al. 2004, Fan and Wu 2004). After POLL and/or POLM fill 1- or 2-nucleotide long single strand gaps at aligned DNA DSB ends, XRCC4:LIG4 performs the ligation of broken DNA strands, thus completing NHEJ. The presence of NHEJ1 homodimer facilitates the ligation step, especially at mismatched DSB ends (Tsai et al. 2007). Depending on other types of DNA damage present at DNA DSBs, NHEJ can result in error-free products, produce dsDNA with microdeletions and/or mismatched bases, or result in translocations (reviewed by Povrik et al. 2012).
R-HSA-975957	Nonsense Mediated Decay (NMD) enhanced by the Exon Junction Complex (EJC)	During normal translation termination eRF3 associates with the ribosome and then interacts with PABP bound to the polyadenylate tail of the mRNA to release the ribosome and allow a new round of translation to commence. Nonsense-mediated decay (NMD) is triggered if eRF3 at the ribosome interacts with UPF1, which may compete with PABP (reviewed in Isken and Maquat 2007, Chang et al. 2007, Behm-Ansmant et al. 2007, Rebbapragada and Lykke-Andersen 2009, Bhuvanagiri et al. 2010, Nicholson et al. 2010, Durand and Lykke-Andersen 2011). An exon junction located 50-55 nt downstream of a termination codon is observed to enhance NMD.<br> Exon-junction complexes (EJCs) are deposited on the mRNA during splicing in the nucleus, remain on mRNAs after transport to the cytosol, and are dislodged by the ribosome as it progresses along the mRNA during the pioneer round of translation (Gehring et al. 2009). EJCs contain the core factors eIF4A-III, Magoh-Y14, and CASC3 as well as the peripheral factors RNPS1, UPF2, and UPF3. UPF2 and UPF3 recruit UPF1 to eRF3 at the terminating ribosome. Thus an EJC downstream of a termination codon will not have been dislodged during translation and will recruit UPF1, triggering NMD.<br>UPF1 is believed to form a complex containing SMG1, SMG8, and SMG9. In the key regulatory step of NMD SMG1 phosphorylates UPF1. The phosphorylated UPF1 then recruits either SMG6 or SMG5 and SMG7. SMG6 is itself an endoribonuclease that cleaves the mRNA. SMG5 and SMG7 do not have endoribonuclease activty, but are thought to recruit ribonucleases. Nonsense-mediated decay has been observed to involve deadenlyation, decapping, and both 5' to 3' and 3' to 5' exonuclease activities, but the exact degradative pathways taken by a given mRNA are not yet known.<br>UPF1 also plays roles in Staufen-mediated decay, histone mRNA decay, telomere maintenance, genome integrity, and may play a role in normal termination of translation.
R-HSA-975956	Nonsense Mediated Decay (NMD) independent of the Exon Junction Complex (EJC)	Nonsense-mediated decay has been observed with mRNAs that do not have an exon junction complex (EJC) downstream of the termination codon (reviewed in Isken and Maquat 2007, Chang et al. 2007, Behm-Ansmant et al. 2007, Rebbapragada and Lykke-Andersen 2009, Nicholson et al. 2010). In these cases the trigger is unknown but a correlation with the length of the 3' UTR has sometimes been seen. The current model posits a competition between PABP and UPF1 for access to eRF3 at the terminating ribosome (Ivanov et al. 2008, Singh et al. 2008, reviewed in Bhuvanagiri et al. 2010). Abnormally long 3' UTRs may prevent PABP from efficiently interacting with eRF3 and allow UPF1 to bind eRF3 instead. Long UTRs with hairpin loops may bring PABP closer to eRF3 and help evade NMD (Eberle et al. 2008).<br>The pathway of degradation taken during EJC-independent NMD has not been elucidated. It is thought that phosphorylation of UPF1 by SMG1 and recruitment of SMG6 or SMG5 and SMG7 are involved, as with EJC-enhanced NMD, but this has not yet been shown.
R-HSA-927802	Nonsense-Mediated Decay (NMD)	The Nonsense-Mediated Decay (NMD) pathway activates the destruction of mRNAs containing premature termination codons (PTCs) (reviewed in Isken and Maquat 2007, Chang et al. 2007, Behm-Ansmant et al. 2007, Neu-Yilik and Kulozik 2008, Rebbapragada and Lykke-Andersen 2009, Bhuvanagiri et al. 2010, Nicholson et al. 2010, Durand and Lykke-Andersen 2011). In mammalian cells a termination codon can be recognized as premature if it precedes an exon-exon junction by at least 50-55 nucleotides or if it is followed by an abnormal 3' untranslated region (UTR). While length of the UTR may play a part, the qualifications for being "abnormal" have not been fully elucidated. Also, some termination codons preceding exon junctions are not degraded by NMD so the criteria for triggering NMD are not yet fully known (reviewed in Rebbapragada and Lykke-Andersen 2009). While about 30% of disease-associated mutations in humans activate NMD, about 10% of normal human transcripts are also degraded by NMD (reviewed in Stalder and Muhlemann 2008, Neu-Yilik and Kulozik 2008, Bhuvanagiri et al. 2010, Nicholson et al. 2010). Thus NMD is a normal physiological process controlling mRNA stability in unmutated cells.<br>Exon junction complexes (EJCs) are deposited on an mRNA during splicing in the nucleus and are displaced by ribosomes during the first round of translation. When a ribosome terminates translation the A site encounters the termination codon and the eRF1 factor enters the empty A site and recruits eRF3. Normally, eRF1 cleaves the translated polypeptide from the tRNA in the P site and eRF3 interacts with Polyadenylate-binding protein (PABP) bound to the polyadenylated tail of the mRNA.<br>During activation of NMD eRF3 interacts with UPF1 which is contained in a complex with SMG1, SMG8, and SMG9. NMD can arbitrarily be divided into EJC-enhanced and EJC-independent pathways. In EJC-enhanced NMD, an exon junction is located downstream of the PTC and the EJC remains on the mRNA after termination of the pioneer round of translation. The core EJC is associated with UPF2 and UPF3, which interact with UPF1 and stimulate NMD. Once bound near the PTC, UPF1 is phosphorylated by SMG1. The phosphorylation is the rate-limiting step in NMD and causes UPF1 to recruit either SMG6, which is an endoribonuclease, or SMG5 and SMG7, which recruit ribonucleases. SMG6 and SMG5:SMG7 recruit phosphatase PP2A to dephosphorylate UPF1 and allow further rounds of degradation. How EJC-independent NMD is activated remains enigmatic but may involve competition between PABP and UPF1 for eRF3.
R-HSA-427413	NoRC negatively regulates rRNA expression	Only about half of the rRNA gene copies in a cell are expressed. The remaining copies are silenced by modifications to histones and DNA (reviewed in Santoro and Grummt 2001, Grummt 2007, Preuss and Pikaard 2007, Birch and Zomerdijk 2008, McStay and Grummt 2008, Grummt and Langst 2013). The promoters of silenced rRNA gene copies have methylated cytosine and histone H3 dimethylated at lysine-9. As inferred from mouse, silencing is initiated by recruitment of the Nucleolar Remodeling Complex (NoRC) to the promoter through interaction with TTF-I and intergenic spacer transcripts. NoRC shifts a nucleosome near the start of rRNA transcription into a more repressive location and recruits Histone Deacetylase 1 and 2 (HDAC1, HDAC2) and DNA Methyltransferase 1 and 3b (DNMT1, DNMT3b). Interaction with a Histone Methyltransferase is also assumed. Deacetylation of histones is required for DNA methylation but not for methylation of histone H3. Methylcytosine at the rRNA promoter binds Methyl Domain Binding protein 2 (MBD2) which inhibits expression of the rRNA gene.
R-HSA-181430	Norepinephrine Neurotransmitter Release Cycle	Noradrenalin release cycle consists of reacidification of the empty clathrin sculpted monoamine transport vesicle, loading of dopamine into reacidified clathrin coated monamine transport vesicle, conversion of dopamine into Noradrenalin, docking and priming of the noradrenalin synaptic veiscle and then release of noradrenalin synaptic vesicle. In the peripheral nervous system in the peripheral nervous system noradrenalin is stored in large and small dense vesicles and is realesed from large vesicles.
R-HSA-203754	NOSIP mediated eNOS trafficking	eNOS-interacting protein (NOSIP) is a 34-kDa nucleocytoplasmic shuttling protein that binds to the COOH-terminal region (amino acids 366-486) of the eNOS oxygenase domain. This protein association promotes translocation of eNOS from the plasma membrane caveolae to the cytoskeleton and inhibits eNOS activity. Studies have found that NOSIP accumulates in the cytoplasm specifically during the G2 phase of the cell cycle.
R-HSA-203641	NOSTRIN mediated eNOS trafficking	eNOS traffic inducer (NOSTRIN) is a novel 506-amino acid eNOS-interacting protein. Along with a decrease in eNOS activity, NOSTRIN causes translocation of eNOS from the plasma membrane to intracellular vesicular structures. NOSTRIN functions as an adaptor protein through homotrimerization and recruitment of eNOS, dynamin-2, and N-WASP to its SH3 domain. Studies indicated that NOSTRIN may facilitate vesicle fission and endocytosis of eNOS by coordinating the function of dynamin and N-WASP, which in turn, recruits the Arp2/3 complex, initiating actin filament polymerization. Overall, this process is thought to occur via caveolar endocytosis. <br><br><br><br>
R-HSA-350054	Notch-HLH transcription pathway	<b>THE NOTCH-HLH TRANSCRIPTION PATHWAY:</b> <br><br> Notch signaling was first identified in Drosophila, where it has been studied in detail at the genetic, molecular, biochemical and cellular levels (reviewed in Justice, 2002; Bray, 2006; Schweisguth, 2004; Louvri, 2006). In Drosophila, Notch signaling to the nucleus is thought always to be mediated by one specific DNA binding transcription factor, Suppressor of Hairless. In mammals, the homologous genes are called CBF1 (or RBPJkappa), while in worms they are called Lag-1, so that the acronym "CSL" has been given to this conserved transcription factor family. There are at least two human CSL homologues, which are now named RBPJ and RBPJL.<br><br>CSL is an example of a bifunctional DNA-binding transcription factor that mediates repression of specific target genes in one context, but activation of the same targets in another context. This bifunctionality is mediated by the association of specific Co-Repressor complexes vs. specific Co-Activator complexes in different contexts, namely in the absence or presence of Notch signaling.<br><br>In Drosophila, Su(H) represses target gene transcription in the absence of Notch signaling, but activates target genes during Notch signaling. At least some of the mammalian CSL homologues are believed also to be bifunctional, and to mediate target gene repression in the absence of Notch signaling, and activation in the presence of Notch signaling.<br><br>Notch Co-Activator and Co-Repressor complexes: This repression is mediated by at least one specific co-repressor complexes (Co-R) bound to CSL in the absence of Notch signaling. In Drosophila, this co-repressor complex consists of at least three distinct co-repressor proteins: Hairless, Groucho, and dCtBP (Drosophila C-terminal Binding Protein). Hairless has been show to bind directly to Su(H), and Groucho and dCtBP have been shown to bind directly to Hairless (Barolo, 2002). All three of the co-repressor proteins have been shown to be necessary for proper gene regulation during Notch signaling in vivo (Nagel, 2005).<br><br>In mammals, the same general pathway and mechanisms are observed, where CSL proteins are bifunctional DNA binding transcription factors (TFs), that bind to Co-Repressor complexes to mediate repression in the absence of Notch signaling, and bind to Co-Activator complexes to mediate activation in the presence of Notch signaling. However, in mammals, there may be multiple co-repressor complexes, rather than the single Hairless co-repressor complex that has been observed in Drosophila. <br><br>During Notch signaling in all systems, the Notch transmembrane receptor is cleaved and the Notch intracellular domain (NICD) translocates to the nucleus, where it there functions as a specific transcription co-activator for CSL proteins. In the nucleus, NICD replaces the Co-R complex bound to CSL, thus resulting in de-repression of Notch target genes in the nucleus. Once bound to CSL, NICD and CSL proteins recruit an additional co-activator protein, Mastermind, to form a CSL-NICD-Mam ternary co-activator (Co-A) complex. This Co-A complex was initially thought to be sufficient to mediate activation of at least some Notch target genes. However, there now is evidence that still other co-activators and additional DNA-binding transcription factors are required in at least some contexts (reviewed in Barolo, 2002).<br><br>Mammalian CSL Corepressor Complexes: In the absence of activated Notch signaling, DNA-bound CSL proteins recruit a corepressor complex to maintain target genes in the repressed state until Notch is specifically activated. The mammalian corepressor complexes include NCOR complexes, but may also include additional corepressor proteins, such as SHARP (reviewed in Mumm, 2000 and Kovall, 2007). The exact composition of the CSL NCOR complex is not known, but in other pathways the "core" NCOR corepressor complex includes at least one NCOR protein (NCOR1, NCOR2, CIR), one Histone Deacetylase protein (HDAC1, HDAC2, HDAC3, etc), and one TBL1 protein (TBL1X, TBL1XR1) (reviewed in Rosenfeld, 2006). In some contexts, the core NCOR corepressor complex may also recruit additional corepressor proteins or complexes, such as the SIN3 complex, which consists of SIN3 (SIN3A, SIN3B), and SAP30, or other SIN3-associated proteins. An additional CSL - NCOR binding corepressor, SHARP, may also contribute to the CSL corepressor complex in some contexts (Oswald, 2002). The CSL corepressor complex also includes a bifunctional cofactor, SKIP, that is present in both CSL corepressor complexes and CSL coactivator complexes, and may function in the binding of NICD and displacement of the corepressor complex during activated Notch signaling (Zhou, 2000).<br><br>Mammalian CSL Coactivator Complexes: Upon activation of Notch signaling, cleavage of the transmembrane Notch receptor releases the Notch Intracellular Domain (NICD), which translocates to the nucleus, where it binds to CSL and displaces the corepressor complex from CSL (reviewed in Mumm, 2000 and Kovall, 2007). The resulting CSL-NICD "binary complex" then recruits an additional coactivator, Mastermind (Mam), to form a ternary complex. The ternary complex then recruits additional, more general coactivators, such as CREB Binding Protein (CBP), or the related p300 coactivator, and a number of Histone Acetytransferase (HAT) proteins, including GCN5 and PCAF (Fryer, 2002). There is evidence that Mam also can subsequently recruit specific kinases that phosphorylate NICD, to downregulate its function and turn off Notch signaling (Fryer, 2004).<br><br>Combinatorial Complexity in Transcription Cofactor Complexes: HDAC9 has at least 7 splice isoforms, with some having distinct interaction and functional properties. Isoforms 6 and 7 interact with NCOR1. Isoforms 1 and 4 interact with MEF2 (Sparrow, 1999), which is a specific DNA-binding cofactor for a subset of HLH proteins. Isoform 3 interacts with both NCOR1 and MEF2. Although many HDACs only have one or two isoforms, this complexity for HDAC9 illustrates the level of transcript complexity and functional specificity that such "general" transcriptional cofactors can have.
R-HSA-2122947	NOTCH1 Intracellular Domain Regulates Transcription	NICD1 produced by activation of NOTCH1 in response to Delta and Jagged ligands (DLL/JAG) presented in trans, traffics to the nucleus where it acts as a transcription regulator. In the nucleus, NICD1 displaces the NCOR corepressor complex from RBPJ (CSL). When bound to the co-repressor complex that includes NCOR proteins (NCOR1 and NCOR2) and HDAC histone deacetylases, RBPJ (CSL) represses transcription of NOTCH target genes (Kao et al. 1998, Zhou et al. 2000, Perissi et al. 2004, Perissi et al. 2008). Once the co-repressor complex is displaced, NICD1 recruits MAML (mastermind-like) to RBPJ, while MAML recruits histone acetyltransferases EP300 (p300) and PCAF, resulting in formation of the NOTCH coactivator complex that activates transcription from NOTCH regulatory elements. The minimal functional NOTCH coactivator complex that activates transcription from NOTCH regulatory elements is a heterotrimer composed of NICD, MAML and RBPJ (Fryer et al. 2002, Wallberg et al. 2002, Nam et al. 2006). <br><br> <br>NOTCH1 coactivator complex is known to activate transcription of HES1 (Jarriault et al. 1995), HES5 (Arnett et al. 2010), HEY genes (Fischer et al. 2004, Leimeister et al. 2000, Maier et al. 2000, Arnett et al. 2010) and MYC (Palomero et al. 2006) and likely regulates transcription of many other genes (Wang et al. 2011). NOTCH1 coactivator complex on any specific regulatory element may involve additional transcriptional regulatory proteins. HES1 binds TLE proteins, forming an evolutionarily conserved transcriptional corepressor involved in regulation of neurogenesis, segmentation and sex determination (Grbavec et al. 1996, Fisher et al. 1996, Paroush et al. 1994). <br><br>After NOTCH1 coactivator complex is assembled on a NOTCH-responsive promoter, MAML (mastermind-like) recruits CDK8 in complex with cyclin C, triggering phosphorylation of conserved serine residues in TAD and PEST domains of NICD1 by CDK8. Phosphorylated NICD1 is recognized by the E3 ubiquitin ligase FBXW7 which ubiquitinates NICD1, leading to degradation of NICD1 and downregulation of NOTCH1 signaling. FBXW7-mediated ubiquitination and degradation of NOTCH1 depend on C-terminally located PEST domain sequences in NOTCH1 (Fryer et al. 2004, Oberg et al. 2001, Wu et al. 2001). The PEST domain of NOTCH1 and the substrate binding WD40 domain of FBXW7 are frequent targets of mutations in T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia - T-ALL (Welcker and Clurman 2008). <br><br> NICD1, which normally has a short half-life, can be stabilized by binding to the hypoxia-inducable factor 1-alpha (HIF1A) which accumulates in the nucleus when oxygen levels are low. This results in HIF1A-induced inhibition of cellular differentiation that is NOTCH-dependent (Gustafsson et al. 2005).
R-HSA-2979096	NOTCH2 Activation and Transmission of Signal to the Nucleus	Similar to NOTCH1, NOTCH2 is activated by Delta-like and Jagged ligands (DLL/JAG) expressed in trans on a neighboring cell (Shimizu et al. 1999, Shimizu et al. 2000, Hicks et al. 2000, Ji et al. 2004). The activation triggers cleavage of NOTCH2, first by ADAM10 at the S2 cleavage site (Gibb et al. 2010, Shimizu et al. 2000), then by gamma-secretase at the S3 cleavage site (Saxena et al. 2001, De Strooper et al. 1999), resulting in the release of the intracellular domain of NOTCH2, NICD2, into the cytosol. NICD2 subsequently traffics to the nucleus where it acts as a transcription regulator. <br><br>While DLL and JAG ligands are well established, canonical NOTCH2 ligands, there is limited evidence that NOTCH2, similar to NOTCH1, can be activated by CNTN1 (contactin 1), a protein involved in oligodendrocyte maturation (Hu et al. 2003). MDK (midkine), which plays an important role in epithelial to mesenchymal transition, can also activate NOTCH2 signaling and is able to bind to the extracellular domain of NOTCH2, but the exact mechanism of MDK-induced NOTCH2 activation has not been elucidated (Huang et al. 2008, Gungor et al. 2011).
R-HSA-2197563	NOTCH2 intracellular domain regulates transcription	In the nucleus, NICD2 forms a complex with RBPJ (CBF1, CSL) and MAML (mastermind). NICD2:RBPJ:MAML complex activates transcription from RBPJ-binding promoter elements (RBEs) (Wu et al. 2000). Besides NICD2, RBPJ and MAML, NOTCH2 coactivator complex likely includes other proteins, shown as components of the NOTCH1 coactivator complex.<br><br> NOTCH2 coactivator complex directly stimulates transcription of HES1 and HES5 genes (Shimizu et al. 2002), both of which are known NOTCH1 targets.<br><br>The promoter of FCER2 (CD23A) contains several RBEs that are occupied by NOTCH2 but not NOTCH1 coactivator complexes, and NOTCH2 activation stimulates FCER2 transcription. Overexpression of FCER2 (CD23A) is a hallmark of B-cell chronic lymphocytic leukemia (B-CLL) and correlates with the malfunction of apoptosis, which is thought be an underlying mechanism of B-CLL development. The Epstein-Barr virus protein EBNA2 can also activate FCER2 transcription through RBEs, possibly by mimicking NOTCH2 signaling (Hubmann et al. 2002).<br><br>NOTCH2 coactivator complex occupies the proximal RBE of the GZMB (granzyme B) promoter and at the same time interacts with phosphorylated CREB1, bound to an adjacent CRE site. EP300 transcriptional coactivator is also recruited to this complex through association with CREB1 (Maekawa et al. 2008). NOTCH2 coactivator complex together with CREBP1 and EP300 stimulates transcription of GZMB (granzyme B), which is important for the cytotoxic function of CD8+ T-cells (Maekawa et al. 2008).<br><br>There are indications that NOTCH2 genetically interacts with hepatocyte nuclear factor 1-beta (HNF1B) in kidney development (Massa et al. 2013, Heliot et al. 2013) and with hepatocyte nuclear factor 6 (HNF6) in bile duct formation (Vanderpool et al. 2012), but the exact nature of these genetic interactions has not been defined.<br><br>
R-HSA-1368071	NR1D1 (REV-ERBA) represses gene expression	REV-ERBA binds DNA elements very similar to those bound by the transcription activator RORA. RORAREV-ERBA bound to DNA and heme recruits the corepressors NCoR and HDAC3 to repress transcription. Thus REV-ERBA and RORA appear to compete to repress or activate genes, repectively.
R-HSA-193648	NRAGE signals death through JNK	Once bound by either NGF or proNGF, p75NTR interacts with NRAGE, thus leading to phosphorylation and activation of JUN Kinase (JNK). JNK controls apoptosis in two ways: it induces transcription of pro-apoptotic genes, and directly activates the cell death machinery. Only NGF-bound p75NTR is shown here.
R-HSA-447038	NrCAM interactions	The NgCAM-related cell adhesion molecule (NrCAM) is member of the L1 family involved in the eye development and node of Ranvier. Like all the other members of L1 family NrCAM also has the ability to bind to ankyrins. The last C-terminal amino acids of NrCAM form a PDZ-binding motif and can interact with SAP (synapse-associated protein) 102 and SAP97. Member of the GPI-anchored TAG-1/axonin-1 have been shown to interact with NrCAM. NrCAM also binds the Sema3B receptor NP-2 to mediate repulsive axon guidance. 
R-HSA-205043	NRIF signals cell death from the nucleus	NRIF (nuclear receptor-interacting factor) is a DNA binding protein that is essential for p75-mediated apoptosis in retina and sympathetic neurons. Neurotrophin or proneurotrophin binding to p75TR induces nuclear translocation of NRIF, which involves gamma-secretase cleavage of p75NTR ICD (Intra Cellular Domain). Once in the nucleus, NRIF mediates apoptosis, probably by acting as transcription factor.
R-HSA-2980766	Nuclear Envelope Breakdown	The nuclear envelope breakdown (NEBD) happens in late prophase of mitosis and involves disassembly of the nuclear pore complex, depolymerization of the nuclear lamina, and clearance of nuclear envelope from chromatin. NEBD allows mitotic spindle microtubules to access condensed chromosomes at kinetochores and enables nuclear division and segregation of genetic material to two daughter cells. For a recent review, please refer to Guttinger et al. 2009.
R-HSA-2995410	Nuclear Envelope Reassembly	The reassembly of the nuclear envelope (NE) around separated sister chromatids begins in late anaphase and is completed in telophase. Nuclear pore complexes (NPCs) reassemble and insert into the reforming nuclear envelope (reviewed by Guttinger et al. 2009).
R-HSA-198725	Nuclear Events (kinase and transcription factor activation)	An important function of the kinase cascade triggered by neurotrophins is to induce the phosphorylation and activation of transcription factors in the nucleus to initiate new programs of gene expression. Transcription factors directly activated by neurotrophin signalling are responsible for induction of immediate-early genes, many of which are transcription factors. These in turn are involved in the induction of delayed-early genes.
R-HSA-180746	Nuclear import of Rev protein	Nuclear import of Rev involves the cellular proteins including importin-beta and B23 and is mediated by an arginine-rich nuclear localization signal (NLS) within the RNA binding domain of the Rev protein. The NLS of Rev associates with importin- beta as well as B23 which has been shown to function in the nuclear import of ribosomal proteins. The Rev-importin beta-B23 complex associates with the nuclear pore through interactions between importin beta and nucleoporin. Upon entry into the nucleus, Ran-GTP associates with importin beta resulting in in the disassembly of the importin beta-Rev-B23 complex and the release of Rev cargo.
R-HSA-3301854	Nuclear Pore Complex (NPC) Disassembly	Nuclear envelope breakdown in mitosis involves permeabilization of the nuclear envelope through disassembly of the nuclear pore complex (NPC) (reviewed by Guttinger et al. 2009). Nucleoporin NUP98, located at both the cytoplasmic and the nucleoplasmic side of the NPC (Griffis et al. 2003), and involved in the formation of the transport barrier through its FG (phenylalanine glycine) repeats that protrude into the central cavity of the NPC (Hulsmann et al. 2012), is probably the first nucleoporin that dissociates from the NPC at the start of mitotic NPC disassembly (Dultz et al. 2008). NUP98 dissociation is triggered by phosphorylation. Phosphorylation of NUP98 by CDK1 and NIMA family kinases NEK6 and/or NEK7 is needed for NUP98 dissociation from the NPC (Laurell et al. 2011). While the phosphorylation of NUP98 by CDK1 and NEK6/7 is likely to occur simultaneously, CDK1 and NEK6/7-mediated phosphorylations are shown as separate events, for clarity purposes.
R-HSA-383280	Nuclear Receptor transcription pathway	A classic example of bifunctional transcription factors is the family of Nuclear Receptor (NR) proteins. These are DNA-binding transcription factors that bind certain hormones, vitamins, and other small, diffusible signaling molecules. The non-liganded NRs recruit specific corepressor complexes of the NCOR/SMRT type, to mediate transcriptional repression of the target genes to which they are bound. During signaling, ligand binding to a specific domain the NR proteins induces a conformational change that results in the exchange of the associated CoR complex, and its replacement by a specific coactivator complex of the TRAP / DRIP / Mediator type. These coactivator complexes typically nucleate around a MED1 coactivator protein that is directly bound to the NR transcription factor.<p>A general feature of the 49 human NR proteins is that in the unliganded state, they each bind directly to an NCOR corepressor protein, either NCOR1 or NCOR2 (NCOR2 was previously named "SMRT"). This NCOR protein nucleates the assembly of additional, specific corepressor proteins, depending on the cell and DNA context. The NR-NCOR interaction is mediated by a specific protein interaction domain (PID) present in the NRs that binds to specific cognate PID(s) present in the NCOR proteins. Thus, the human NRs each take part in an NR-NCOR binding reaction in the absence of binding by their ligand.<p>A second general feature of the NR proteins is that they each contain an additional, but different PID that mediates specific binding interactions with MED1 proteins. In the ligand-bound state, NRs each take part in an NR-MED1 binding reaction to form an NR-MED1 complex. The bound MED1 then functions to nucleate the assembly of additional specific coactivator proteins, depending on the cell and DNA context, such as what specific target gene promoter they are bound to, and in what cell type.<p>The formation of specific MED1-containing coactivator complexes on specific NR proteins has been well-characterized for a number of the human NR proteins (see Table 1 in (Bourbon, 2004)). For example, binding of thyroid hormone (TH) to the human TH Receptor (THRA or THRB) was found to result in the recruitment of a specific complex of Thyroid Receptor Associated Proteins - the TRAP coactivator complex - of which the TRAP220 subunit was later identified to be the Mediator 1 (MED1) homologue.<p>Similarly, binding of Vitamin D to the human Vitamin D3 Receptor was found to result in the recruitment of a specific complex of D Receptor Interacting Proteins - the DRIP coactivator complex, of which the DRIP205 subunit was later identified to be human MED1.
R-HSA-1251985	Nuclear signaling by ERBB4	Besides signaling as a transmembrane receptor, ligand activated homodimers of ERBB4 JM-A isoforms (ERBB4 JM-A CYT1 and ERBB4 JM-A CYT2) undergo proteolytic cleavage by ADAM17 (TACE) in the juxtamembrane region, resulting in shedding of the extracellular domain and formation of an 80 kDa membrane bound ERBB4 fragment known as ERBB4 m80 (Rio et al. 2000, Cheng et al. 2003). ERBB4 m80 undergoes further proteolytic cleavage, mediated by the gamma-secretase complex, which releases the soluble 80 kDa ERBB4 intracellular domain, known as ERBB4 s80 or E4ICD, into the cytosol (Ni et al. 2001). ERBB4 s80 is able to translocate to the nucleus, promote nuclear translocation of various transcription factors, and act as a transcription co-factor. In neuronal precursors, ERBB4 s80 binds the complex of TAB and NCOR1, helps to move the complex into the nucleus, and is a co-factor of TAB:NCOR1-mediated inhibition of expression of astrocyte differentiation genes GFAP and S100B (Sardi et al. 2006). In mammary cells, ERBB4 s80 recruits STAT5A transcription factor in the cytosol, shuttles it to the nucleus, and acts as the STAT5A co-factor in binding to and promoting transcription from the beta-casein (CSN2) promoter, and may be involved in the regulation of other lactation-related genes (Williams et al. 2004, Muraoka-Cook et al. 2008). ERBB4 s80 was also shown to bind activated estrogen receptor in the nucleus and act as its transcriptional co-factor in promoting transcription of some estrogen-regulated genes, such as progesterone receptor gene NR3C3 and CXCL12 i.e. SDF1 (Zhu et al. 2006). <br><br>The C-tail of ERBB4 possesses several WW-domain binding motifs (three in CYT1 isoform and two in CYT2 isoform), which enable interaction of ERBB4 with WW-domain containing proteins. ERBB4 s80, through WW-domain binding motifs, interacts with YAP1 transcription factor, a known proto-oncogene, and may be a co-regulator of YAP1-mediated transcription (Komuro et al. 2003, Omerovic et al. 2004). The tumor suppressor WWOX, another WW-domain containing protein, competes with YAP1 in binding to ERBB4 s80 and prevents translocation of ERBB4 s80 to the nucleus (Aqeilan et al. 2005). ERBB4 s80 is also able to translocate to the mitochondrial matrix, presumably when its nuclear translocation is inhibited. Once in the mitochondrion, the BH3 domain of ERBB4, characteristic of BCL2 family members, may enable it to act as a pro-apoptotic factor (Naresh et al. 2006).
R-HSA-774815	Nucleosome assembly	The formation of centromeric chromatin assembly outside the context of DNA replication involves the assembly of nucleosomes containing the histone H3 variant CenH3 (also called CENP-A).
R-HSA-5696398	Nucleotide Excision Repair	Nucleotide excision repair (NER) was first described in the model organism E. coli in the early 1960s as a process whereby bulky base damage is enzymatically removed from DNA, facilitating the recovery of DNA synthesis and cell survival. Deficient NER processes have been identified from the cells of cancer-prone patients with different variants of xeroderma pigmentosum (XP), trichothiodystrophy (TTD), and Cockayne's syndrome. The XP cells exhibit an ultraviolet radiation hypersensitivity that leads to a hypermutability response to UV, offering a direct connection between deficient NER, increased mutation rate, and cancer. While the NER pathway in prokaryotes is unique, the pathway utilized in yeast and higher eukaryotes is highly conserved.<BR>NER is involved in the repair of bulky adducts in DNA, such as UV-induced photo lesions (both 6-4 photoproducts (6-4 PPDs) and cyclobutane pyrimidine dimers (CPDs)), as well as chemical adducts formed from exposure to aflatoxin, benzopyrene and other genotoxic agents. Specific proteins have been identified that participate in base damage recognition, cleavage of the damaged strand on both sides of the lesion, and excision of the oligonucleotide bearing the lesion. Reparative DNA synthesis and ligation restore the strand to its original state.<BR>NER consists of two related pathways called global genome nucleotide excision repair (GG-NER) and transcription-coupled nucleotide excision repair (TC-NER). The pathways differ in the way in which DNA damage is initially recognized, but the majority of the participating molecules are shared between these two branches of NER. GG-NER is transcription-independent, removing lesions from non-coding DNA strands, as well as coding DNA strands that are not being actively transcribed. TC-NER repairs damage in transcribed strands of active genes.<BR>Several of the proteins involved in NER are key components of the basal transcription complex TFIIH. An ubiquitin ligase complex composed of DDB1, CUL4A or CUL4B and RBX1 participates in both GG-NER and TC-NER, implying an important role of ubiquitination in NER regulation. The establishment of mutant mouse models for NER genes and other DNA repair-related genes has been useful in demonstrating the associations between NER defects and cancer.<BR>For past and recent reviews of nucleotide excision repair, please refer to Lindahl and Wood 1998, Friedberg et al. 2002, Christmann et al. 2003, Hanawalt and Spivak 2008, Marteijn et al. 2014).
R-HSA-168643	Nucleotide-binding domain, leucine rich repeat containing receptor (NLR) signaling pathways	The innate immune system is the first line of defense against invading microorganisms, a broad specificity response characterized by the recruitment and activation of phagocytes and the release of anti-bacterial peptides. The receptors involved recognize conserved molecules present in microbes called pathogen-associated molecular patterns (PAMPs), and/or molecules that are produced as a result of tissue injury, the damage associated molecular pattern molecules (DAMPs). PAMPs are essential to the pathogen and therefore unlikely to vary. Examples are lipopolysaccharide (LPS), peptidoglycans (PGNs) and viral RNA. DAMPs include intracellular proteins, such as heat-shock proteins and extracellular matrix proteins released by tissue injury, such as hyaluronan fragments. Non-protein DAMPs include ATP, uric acid, heparin sulfate and dsDNA. The receptors for these factors are referred to collectively as pathogen- or pattern-recognition receptors (PRRs). The best studied of these are the membrane-associated Toll-like receptor family. Less well studied but more numerous are the intracellular nucleotide-binding domain, leucine rich repeat containing receptors (NLRs) also called nucleotide binding oligomerization domain (NOD)-like receptors, a family with over 20 members in humans and over 30 in mice. These recognise PAMPs/DAMPs from phagocytosed microorganisms or from intracellular infections (Kobayashi et al. 2003, Proell et al. 2008, Wilmanski et al. 2008). Some NLRs are involved in process unrelated to pathogen detection such as tissue homeostasis, apoptosis, graft-versus-host disease and early development (Kufer & Sansonetti 2011). <br><br><br>Structurally NLRs can be subdivided into the caspase-recruitment domain (CARD)-containing NLRCs (NODs) and the pyrin domain (PYD)-containing NLRPs (NALPs), plus outliers including ice protease (caspase-1) activating factor (IPAF) (Martinon & Tschopp, 2005). In practical terms, NLRs can be divided into the relatively well characterized NOD1/2 which signal via RIP2 primarily to NFkappaB, and the remainder, some of which participate in macromolecular structures called Inflammasomes that activate caspases. Mutations in several members of the NLR protein family have been linked to inflammatory diseases, suggesting these molecules play important roles in maintaining host-pathogen interactions and inflammatory responses.<br><br><br>Most NLRs have a tripartite structure consisting of a variable amino-terminal domain, a central nucleotide-binding oligomerization domain (NOD or NACHT) that is believed to mediate the formation of self oligomers, and a carboxy-terminal leucine-rich repeat (LRR) that detects PAMPs/DAMPs. In most cases the amino-terminal domain includes protein-interaction modules, such as CARD or PYD, some harbour baculovirus inhibitor repeat (BIR) or other domains. For most characterised NLRs these domains have been attributed to downstream signaling<br><br>Under resting conditions, NLRs are thought to be present in an autorepressed form, with the LRR folded back onto the NACHT domain preventing oligomerization. Accessory proteins may help maintain the inactive state. PAMP/DAMP exposure is thought to triggers conformational changes that expose the NACHT domain enabling oligomerization and recruitment of effectors, though it should be noted that due to the lack of availability of structural data, the mechanistic details of NLR activation remain largely elusive.<br><br>New terminology for NOD-like receptors was adopted by the Human Genome Organization (HUGO) in 2008 to standardize the nomenclature of NLRs. The acronym NLR, once standing for NOD-like receptor, now is an abbreviation of 'nucleotide-binding domain, leucine-rich repeat containing' protein. The term NOD-like receptor is officially outdated and replaced by NLRC where the C refers to the CARD domain. However the official gene symbols for NOD1 and NOD2 still contain NOD and this general term is still widely used.
R-HSA-418038	Nucleotide-like (purinergic) receptors	Purinergic receptors (Burnstock G, 2006; Abbracchio MP et al, 2009) are a family of newly characterized plasma membrane molecules involved in several cellular functions such as vascular reactivity, apoptosis and cytokine secretion. The functions of these receptors are as yet only partially characterized. The family includes the GPCR P2Y purinergic receptors and adenosine P1 receptors. A third family member, the P2X receptor, is a ligand-gated ion channel. 
R-HSA-5173214	O-glycosylation of TSR domain-containing proteins	The O-fucosylation of proteins containing thrombospondin type 1 repeat (TSR) domains is an important PTM, regulating many biological processes such as Notch signalling, inflammation, wound healing, angiogenesis amd neoplasia (Adams & Tucker 2000, Moremen et al. 2012). Fucose addition is carried out by two protein fucosyltransferases, POFUT1 and 2. Only POFUT2 recognises the consensus sequence CSXS/TCG found in TSR1 domains and the fucosyl residue is attached to the hydroxyl group of conserved serine (S) or threonine (T) residues within the consensus sequence. The modification was first demonstrated on thrombospondin 1, found in platelets and the ECM (Hofsteenge et al. 2001, Luo et al. 2006). The resulting O-fucosyl-protein is subsequently a substrate for beta-1,3-glucosyltransferase-like protein (B3GALTL), which adds a glucosyl moiety to form the rare disaccharide modification Glc-beta-1,3-Fuc. More than 60 human proteins contain TSR1 domains, The disaccharide modification has been demonstrated on a small number of these TSR1 domain-containing proteins such as thrombospondin 1 (Hofsteenge et al. 2001, Luo et al. 2006), properdin (Gonzalez de Peredo et al. 2002) and F-spondin (Gonzalez de Peredo et al. 2002). The ADAMTS (a disintegrin-like and metalloprotease domain with thrombospondin type-1 repeats) superfamily consists of 19 secreted metalloproteases (ADAMTS proteases) and at lease five ADAMTS-like proteins in humans. Five members of the ADAMTS superfamily have also had experimental confirmation of the disaccharide modification. Examples are ADAMTS13 (Ricketts et al. 2007) and ADAMTSL1 (Wang et al. 2007). In the two reactions described here, the TSR1 domain-containing proteins with similarity to the experimentally confirmed ones are included as putative substrates.
R-HSA-5173105	O-linked glycosylation	O-glycosylation is an important post-translational modification (PTM) required for correct functioning of many proteins (Van den Steen et al. 1998, Moremen et al. 2012). The O-glycosylation of proteins containing thrombospondin type 1 repeat (TSR) domains and O-glycosylation of mucins are currently described here.
R-HSA-913709	O-linked glycosylation of mucins	Mucins are a family of high molecular weight, heavily glycosylated proteins (glycoconjugates) produced by epithelial tissues in most metazoa. Mucins' key characteristic is their ability to form gels; therefore they are a key component in most gel-like secretions, serving functions from lubrication to cell signalling to forming chemical barriers. To date, there are approximately 20 genes that express mucins. Mature mucins are composed of two distinct regions:<br>(1) The amino- and carboxy-terminal regions are very lightly glycosylated, but rich in cysteines. The cysteine residues participate in establishing disulfide linkages within and among mucin monomers.<br>(2) A large central region rich in serine, threonine and proline residues called the variable number of tandem repeat (VNTR) region which can become heavily O-glycosylated with hundreds of O-GalNAc glycans.<br> N-acetyl-galactosamine (GalNAc) is the first glycan to be attached, forming the simplest mucin O-glycan. After this, several different pathways are possible generating "core" structures. Four core structures are commonly formed, several others are possible but infrequent. O-linked glycans are often capped by the addition of a sialic acid residue, terminating the addition of any more O-glycans (Brockhausen et al, 2009; Tarp and Clausen, 2008).
R-HSA-1480926	O2/CO2 exchange in erythrocytes	In capillaries of the lungs erythrocytes release carbon dioxide (CO2) and acquire oxygen (O2). In other tissues of the body the reverse reaction occurs (reviewed in Nikinmaa 1997, Jensen 2004).<br>In the lungs, CO2 bound as carbamate to the N-terminus of hemoglobin (HbA) and protons bound to histidine residues in HbA are released as HbA binds oxygen. Bicarbonate (HCO3-) present in plasma is taken up by erythrocytes via the band3 anion exchanger (AE1, SLC4A1) and combined with protons by carbonic anhydrases I and II (CA1, CA2) to yield water and CO2 (reviewed by Esbaugh & Tufts 2006, De Rosa et al. 2007). The CO2 is passively transported out of the erythrocyte by AQP1 and RhAG. HCO3- in plasma is also directly dehydrated by extracellular carbonic anhydrase IV (CA4) present on endothelial cells lining the capillaries in the lung.<br>In non-pulmonary tissues CO2 in plasma is hydrated to yield protons and HCO3- by CA4 located on the apical plasma membranes of endothelial cells. Plasma CO2 is also taken up by erythrocytes via AQP1 and RhAG. Within erythrocytes CA1 and, predominantly, CA2 hydrate CO2 to yield HCO3- and protons (reviewed in Geers & Gros 2000, Jensen 2004, Boron 2010). HCO3- is transferred out of the erythrocyte by the band 3 anion exchange protein (AE1, SLC4A1) which cotransports a chloride ion into the erythrocyte.<br>Also within the erythrocyte, CO2 combines with the N-terminal alpha amino groups of HbA to form carbamates while protons bind histidine residues in HbA. The net result is the Bohr effect, a conformational change in HbA that reduces its affinity for O2 and hence assists the delivery of O2 to tissues.
R-HSA-381753	Olfactory Signaling Pathway	Mammalian Olfactory Receptor (OR) genes were discoved in rats by Linda Buck and Richard Axel, who predicted that odorants would be detected by a large family of G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) that are selectively expressed in the olfactory epithelium. This prediction was based on previous biochemical evidence that cAMP levels increased in olfactory neurons upon odor stimulation. These predictions proved to be true, and Buck and Axel received a Nobel Prize for this and subsequent work (reviewed in Keller, 2008).<br><br>Subsequent work in mice and other vertebrates has confirmed that OR genes are comprised of a very large family of G Protein-Coupled Receptors (GPCRs) that are selectively-expressed in olfactory epithelium. Although some OR are also expressed selectively in one or a few other tissues, their expression in olfactory-epithelium generally indicates a functional role in mediating olfaction, where they couple binding by odorant ligands with intracellular olfactory signaling. (Note: the other subclasses of GPCR signaling pathways are described under "GPCR Signaling".)<br><br>The ligands for ORs are diverse, ranging from chemical compounds to peptides. Intracellular signaling by OR proteins in mice and other mammalian systems is known to be mediated via direct interactions of OR proteins with an olfactory specific heterotrimeric G Protein, that contains an olfactory-specific G alpha protein: G alpha S OLPH (also named "GNAL").<p>There are two models for GPCR-G Protein interactions: 1) ligand-GPCR binding first, then binding to G Proteins; 2) "Pre-coupling" of GPCRs and G Proteins before ligand binding {reviewed in (Oldham, 2008)}. Both models may be true for certain GPCRs in different contexts. Pre-coupling is likely to be functionally important, as pre-coupling of receptor and G Protein allows much more rapid kinetic response once ligand is bound, because the ligand-bound receptor is immediately able to transduce the signal, rather than having to diffuse around within the plasma membrane until it encounters a G Protein to interact with (Oldham, 2008).<p>The pre-coupling model is used here to characterise the reaction of the human ORs with G Proteins in the absence of ligand, because the ligands in humans are almost completely undocumented experimentally.<p>In model genetic systems such as mice, many candidate OR genes have been shown experimentally to function in olfactory signaling {reviewed in (Keller, 2008)}. For the human OR genes, experimental analysis has been much more limited, although some specific OR genes, such as OR7D4 and OR11H7P have been confirmed to mediate olfactory response and signaling in humans for specific chemical odorants (Keller, 2007; Abbafy, 2007). Mice and other rodents are believed to have about 1000 functional OR genes, as well as many additional pseudogenes. Based on sequence similarities, there are 960 human OR genes, but approximately half of these are pseudogenes {reviewed in (Keller, 2008)}. In mice, essentially all olfactory signaling requires G-alpha-S (OLF), since mouse G-OLF knockouts have been shown to lack essentially all olfactory responses (Belluscio, 1998). Thus, bona fide human OR genes identified by sequence similarity (i.e., not pseudogenes with function-blocking mutations) which are known to be expressed in olfactory epithelium are expected to interact with G alpha S OLF containing G Protein trimers. Therefore, we can model the human ORs which are expressed in human olfactory epithelium as each signaling via interactions with human G-alpha-S-OLF (GNAL).<br><br>Of the 960 human OR genes and pseudogenes, there is experimental evidence which indicates that at least 437 actually are expressed in human olfactory epithelium; this includes 357 OR genes, and 80 OR pseudogenes (Zhang, 2007). These 357 olfactory-expressed OR genes are therefore expected to be functional in the Olfactory Signaling Pathway, and to interact directly with human G alpha olf in human olfactory cells.
R-HSA-190704	Oligomerization of connexins into connexons	The mechanism of connexin assembly into connexons has been well characterized. Two different types of connexons can be formed. A connexon containing six identical connexin molecules is referred to as an homomeric connexon, while a connexon containing at least two different connexin molecules is referred to as an heteromeric connexon. The connexin molecules making up an heteromeric connexon appear to belong to only one subgroup (alpha or beta); heteromeric connexons containing both alpha and beta subunits have not yet been observed. Indeed, an intrinsic signal in four amino acid positions appears to confer different physicochemical characteristics to certain connexins in the alpha and beta groups (Lagr et al., 2003). These intrinsic signals are Cx specific, however (see Gemel et al., 2006). Therefore, additional yet unknown signals are required to regulate connexin compatibility and hetero-oligomerization. <br>The identification of the subcellular location at which gap junction assembly occurs has proven difficult. One explanation for this difficulty may be that the location of oligomerization for each connexon varies depending upon Cx type or cell type. Oligomerization has been observed after ER membrane insertion (Cx43, Cx32, Cx26) (Falk et al., 1997; Ahmad et al., 1999; Ahmad and Evans, 2002), in the ER-Golgi-intermediate compartment (ERGIC) (Cx32) (Diez et al. 1999) and inside the trans-Goligi network (Cx43) (Musil and Goodenough, 1993).
R-HSA-2559585	Oncogene Induced Senescence	Oncogene-induced senescence is triggered by high level of RAS/RAF/MAPK signaling that can be caused, for example, by oncogenic mutations in RAS or RAF proteins, or by oncogenic mutations in growth factor receptors, such as EGFR, that act upstream of RAS/RAF/MAPK cascade. Oncogene-induced senescence can also be triggered by high transcriptional activity of E2F1, E2F2 or E2F3 which can be caused, for example, by the loss-of-function of RB1 tumor suppressor.<br><br>Oncogenic signals trigger transcription of CDKN2A locus tumor suppressor genes: p16-INK4A and p14-ARF. p16-INK4A and p14-ARF share exons 2 and 3, but are expressed from different promoters and use different reading frames. Therefore, while their mRNAs are homologous and are both translationally inhibited by miR-24 microRNA (Lal et al. 2008, To et al. 2012), they share no similarity at the amino acid sequence level and perform distinct functions in the cell. p16-INK4A acts as the inhibitor of cyclin-dependent kinases CDK4 and CDK6 which phosphorylate and inhibit RB1 protein thereby promoting G1 to S transition and cell cycle progression (Serrano et al. 1993). Increased p16-INK4A level leads to hypophosphorylation of RB1, allowing RB1 to inhibit transcription of E2F1, E2F2 and E2F3-target genes that are needed for cell cycle progression, which results in cell cycle arrest in G1 phase. p14-ARF binds and destabilizes MDM2 ubiquitin ligase (Zhang et al. 1998), responsible for ubiquitination and degradation of TP53 (p53) tumor suppressor protein (Wu et al. 1993, Fuchs et al. 1998, Fang et al. 2000). Therefore, increased p14-ARF level leads to increased level of TP53 and increased expression of TP53 target genes, such as p21, which triggers p53-mediated cell cycle arrest and, depending on other factors, may also lead to p53-mediated apoptosis. CDKN2B locus, which encodes an inhibitor of CDK4 and CDK6, p15-INK4B, is located in the vicinity of CDKN2A locus, at the chromosome band 9p21. p15-INK4B, together with p16-INK4A, contributes to senescence of human T-lymphocytes (Erickson et al. 1998) and mouse fibroblasts (Malumbres et al. 2000). SMAD3, activated by TGF-beta-1 signaling, controls senescence in the mouse multistage carcinogenesis model through regulation of MYC and p15-INK4B gene expression (Vijayachandra et al. 2003). TGF-beta-induced p15-INK4B expression is also important for the senescence of hepatocellular carcinoma cell lines (Senturk et al. 2010).<p>MAP kinases MAPK1 (ERK2) and MAPK3 (ERK1), which are activated by RAS signaling, phosphorylate ETS1 and ETS2 transcription factors in the nucleus (Yang et al. 1996, Seidel et al. 2002, Foulds et al. 2004, Nelson et al. 2010). Phosphorylated ETS1 and ETS2 are able to bind RAS response elements (RREs) in the CDKN2A locus and stimulate p16-INK4A transcription (Ohtani et al. 2004). At the same time, activated ERKs (MAPK1 i.e. ERK2 and MAPK3 i.e. ERK1) phosphorylate ERF, the repressor of ETS2 transcription, which leads to translocation of ERF to the cytosol and increased transcription of ETS2 (Sgouras et al. 1995, Le Gallic et al. 2004). ETS2 can be sequestered and inhibited by binding to ID1, resulting in inhibition of p16-INK4A transcription (Ohtani et al. 2004).<br><br>Transcription of p14-ARF is stimulated by binding of E2F transcription factors (E2F1, E2F2 or E2F3) in complex with SP1 to p14-ARF promoter (Parisi et al. 2002).<br><br>Oncogenic RAS signaling affects mitochondrial metabolism through an unknown mechanism, leading to increased generation of reactive oxygen species (ROS), which triggers oxidative stress induced senescence pathway. In addition, increased rate of cell division that is one of the consequences of oncogenic signaling, leads to telomere shortening which acts as another senescence trigger. <br>
R-HSA-111885	Opioid Signalling	Opioids are chemical substances similar to opiates, the active substances found in opium (morphine, codeine etc.). Opioid action is mediated by the receptors for endogenous opioids; peptides such as the enkephalins, the endorphins or the dynorphins. Opioids possess powerful analgesic and sedative effects, and are widely used as pain-killers. Their main side-effect is the rapid establishment of a strong addiction. Opioids receptors are G-protein coupled receptors (GPCR). There are four classes of receptors: mu (MOR), kappa (KOR) and delta (DOR), and the nociceptin receptor (NOP). 
R-HSA-419771	Opsins	Opsins are light-sensitive, 35-55 kDa membrane-bound G protein-coupled receptors of the retinylidene protein family found in photoreceptor cells of the retina. Five classical groups of opsins are involved in vision, mediating the conversion of a photon of light into an electrochemical signal, the first step in the visual transduction cascade (Terakita A, 2005; Nickle B and Robinson PR, 2007). Another opsin found in the mammalian retina, melanopsin, is involved in circadian rhythms and pupillary reflex but not in image-forming (Hankins MW et al, 2008; Kumbalasiri T and Provencio I, 2005). Guanine nucleotide-binding proteins (G proteins) are involved as modulators or transducers in various transmembrane signaling systems. The G protein transducin, encoded by GNAT genes, is one of the transducers of a visual impulse that performs the coupling between rhodopsin and cGMP-phosphodiesterase. Defects in GNAT1 are the cause of congenital stationary night blindness autosomal dominant type 3, also known as congenital stationary night blindness Nougaret type. Congenital stationary night blindness is a non-progressive retinal disorder characterized by impaired night vision (Dryja TP et al, 1996). Defects in GNAT2 are the cause of achromatopsia type 4 (ACHM4). Achromatopsia is an autosomal recessively inherited visual disorder that is present from birth and that features the absence of color discrimination (Kohl S et al, 2002).
R-HSA-389397	Orexin and neuropeptides FF and QRFP bind to their respective receptors	The orphan G protein-coupled receptors mentioned here regulate sleep and appetite.
R-HSA-1852241	Organelle biogenesis and maintenance	This module describes the biogenesis of organelles. Organelles are subcellular structures of distinctive morphology and function. The organelles of human cells include: mitochondria, endoplasmic reticulum, Golgi apparatus, vacuoles, nucleus, (auto)phagosome, centriole, lysosome, melanosome, myofibril, nucleolus, peroxisome, cilia (in some cell types), proteasome, ribsome, and transport vesicles.
R-HSA-561048	Organic anion transport	Organic anion transporters (OATs) mediate the renal absorption and excretion of a broad range of endogenous substrates and anionic drugs such as diuretics and NSAIDs. Five members belong to these polyspecific transporters (OAT1-4 and URAT1) and are predominantly expressed in the kidney (Koepsell H and Endou H, 2004; Rizwan AN and Burckhardt G, 2007; Ahn SY and Bhatnagar V, 2008).
R-HSA-428643	Organic anion transporters	The SLC17 gene family encode proteins which are organic anion transporters. There are three distinct subfamilies within SLC17; vesicular glutamate transporters (VGLUT1-3 encoded by SLC17A7,6 and 8), type I Na+-coupled phosphate co-transporters (encoded by SLC17A1-4) and a proton-coupled sialic acid co-transporter (encoded by SLC17A5) (Reimer RJ and Edwards RH, 2004).<br><br>Two members of the SLC5 gene family encode carboxylate transporters, SMCT1 and SMCT2 (Ganapathy V et al, 2008).
R-HSA-549127	Organic cation transport	The organic cation transporters comprise three SLC22 members, OCT1-3. They can transport a wide range of organic cations including weak bases. All transport by OCTs is electrogenic, sodium-independent and bidirectional. Two further organic cation transporters mediate transport of ergothioneine and carnitine (Koepsell H and Endou H, 2004).
R-HSA-549132	Organic cation/anion/zwitterion transport	The SLC22 gene family of solute carriers function as organic cation transporters (OCTs), cation/zwitterion transporters (OCTNs) and organic anion transporters (OATs). The SLC22 family belongs to the major facilitator superfamily and comprises uniporters, symporters and antiporters.Most of this family are polyspecific transporters. Since many of these transporters are expressed in the liver, kidney and intestine, they play an important role in drug absorption and excretion. Substrates include xenobiotics, drugs, and endogenous amine compounds (Koepsell H and Endou H, 2004).
R-HSA-416700	Other semaphorin interactions	There are eight classes of semaphorins and four types of plexins. Semaphorin (SEMA) classes 1 and 2 are found in invertebrates and classes 3-7 are vertebrate sempahorines. Sempahorin class 3 is secreted, whereas the other classes are synthesised as transmembrane proteins. Vertebrate plexins (PLXNs) are classified into four subfamilies plexin-A to -D. There are four A-type plexins, three B-type, one C-type and D-type. Interactions between different subfamilies of plexins and semaphorins show differential specificity, which trigger different sets of biological functions. Another level of functional specificity specificity is attained by plexins by coupling with various coreceptors expressed in a cell- or tissue-specific manner, such as neuropilins (NRP), L1CAM, c-MET proto-oncogene, ERB2, CD72 and CD45 (Kruger et al. 2005, Law & Lee 2012).
R-HSA-2559580	Oxidative Stress Induced Senescence	Oxidative stress, caused by increased concentration of reactive oxygen species (ROS) in the cell, can happen as a consequence of mitochondrial dysfunction induced by the oncogenic RAS (Moiseeva et al. 2009) or independent of oncogenic signaling. Prolonged exposure to interferon-beta (IFNB, IFN-beta) also results in ROS increase (Moiseeva et al. 2006). ROS oxidize thioredoxin (TXN), which causes TXN to dissociate from the N-terminus of MAP3K5 (ASK1), enabling MAP3K5 to become catalytically active (Saitoh et al. 1998). ROS also stimulate expression of Ste20 family kinases MINK1 (MINK) and TNIK through an unknown mechanism, and MINK1 and TNIK positively regulate MAP3K5 activation (Nicke et al. 2005).<p> <br>MAP3K5 phosphorylates and activates MAP2K3 (MKK3) and MAP2K6 (MKK6) (Ichijo et al. 1997, Takekawa et al. 2005), which act as p38 MAPK kinases, as well as MAP2K4 (SEK1) (Ichijo et al. 1997, Matsuura et al. 2002), which, together with MAP2K7 (MKK7), acts as a JNK kinase.<p> <br>MKK3 and MKK6 phosphorylate and activate p38 MAPK alpha (MAPK14) and beta (MAPK11) (Raingeaud et al. 1996), enabling p38 MAPKs to phosphorylate and activate MAPKAPK2 (MK2) and MAPKAPK3 (MK3) (Ben-Levy et al. 1995, Clifton et al. 1996, McLaughlin et al. 1996, Sithanandam et al. 1996, Meng et al. 2002, Lukas et al. 2004, White et al. 2007), as well as MAPKAPK5 (PRAK) (New et al. 1998 and 2003, Sun et al. 2007).<p> <br>Phosphorylation of JNKs (MAPK8, MAPK9 and MAPK10) by MAP3K5-activated MAP2K4 (Deacon and Blank 1997, Fleming et al. 2000) allows JNKs to migrate to the nucleus (Mizukami et al. 1997) where they phosphorylate JUN. Phosphorylated JUN binds FOS phosphorylated by ERK1 or ERK2, downstream of activated RAS (Okazaki and Sagata 1995, Murphy et al. 2002), forming the activated protein 1 (AP-1) complex (FOS:JUN heterodimer) (Glover and Harrison 1995, Ainbinder et al. 1997). <p> <br>Activation of p38 MAPKs and JNKs downstream of MAP3K5 (ASK1) ultimately converges on transcriptional regulation of CDKN2A locus. In dividing cells, nucleosomes bound to the CDKN2A locus are trimethylated on lysine residue 28 of histone H3 (HIST1H3A) by the Polycomb repressor complex 2 (PRC2), creating the H3K27Me3 (Me3K-28-HIST1H3A) mark (Bracken et al. 2007, Kotake et al. 2007). The expression of Polycomb constituents of PRC2 (Kuzmichev et al. 2002) - EZH2, EED and SUZ12 - and thereby formation of the PRC2, is positively regulated in growing cells by E2F1, E2F2 and E2F3 (Weinmann et al. 2001, Bracken et al. 2003). H3K27Me3 mark serves as a docking site for the Polycomb repressor complex 1 (PRC1) that contains BMI1 (PCGF4) and is therefore named PRC1.4, leading to the repression of transcription of p16-INK4A and p14-ARF from the CDKN2A locus, where PCR1.4 mediated repression of p14-ARF transcription in humans may be context dependent (Voncken et al. 2005, Dietrich et al. 2007, Agherbi et al. 2009, Gao et al. 2012). MAPKAPK2 and MAPKAPK3, activated downstream of the MAP3K5-p38 MAPK cascade, phosphorylate BMI1 of the PRC1.4 complex, leading to dissociation of PRC1.4 complex from the CDKN2A locus and upregulation of p14-ARF transcription (Voncken et al. 2005). AP-1 transcription factor, formed as a result of MAP3K5-JNK signaling, as well as RAS signaling, binds the promoter of KDM6B (JMJD3) gene and stimulates KDM6B expression. KDM6B is a histone demethylase that removes H3K27Me3 mark i.e. demethylates lysine K28 of HIST1H3A, thereby preventing PRC1.4 binding to the CDKN2A locus and allowing transcription of p16-INK4A (Agger et al. 2009, Barradas et al. 2009, Lin et al. 2012).<p> <br>p16-INK4A inhibits phosphorylation-mediated inactivation of RB family members by CDK4 and CDK6, leading to cell cycle arrest (Serrano et al. 1993). p14-ARF inhibits MDM2-mediated degradation of TP53 (p53) (Zhang et al. 1998), which also contributes to cell cycle arrest in cells undergoing oxidative stress. In addition, phosphorylation of TP53 by MAPKAPK5 (PRAK) activated downstream of MAP3K5-p38 MAPK signaling, activates TP53 and contributes to cellular senescence (Sun et al. 2007). 
R-HSA-1234162	Oxygen-dependent asparagine hydroxylation of Hypoxia-inducible Factor Alpha	HIF1AN (FIH, FIH-1) forms a homodimer that hydroxylates an asparagine residue on HIF1A and HIF2A (Hewitson et al. 2002, Lando et al. 2002, Metzen et al. 2003, Lancaster et al. 2004). The hydroxylation of the asparagine interferes with the interaction between HIF1A/HIF2A and p300, a histone acetylase, and therefore inhibits the ability of HIF1A/2A to activate transcription of target genes (Lando et al. 2002). Because molecular oxygen is a substrate of the reaction, hypoxia is a negative regulator of this reaction and thereby increases transcriptional activation of target genes by HIF1A/2A.
R-HSA-1234176	Oxygen-dependent proline hydroxylation of Hypoxia-inducible Factor Alpha	HIF-alpha subunits, comprising HIF1A (Bruick and McKnight 2001, Ivan et al. 2001, Jaakkola et al. 2001), HIF2A (Percy et al. 2008, Furlow et al. 2009), and HIF3A (Maynard et al. 2003), are hydroxylated at proline residues by the prolyl hydroxylases PHD1 (EGLN2), PHD2 (EGLN1), and PHD3 (EGLN3) (Bruick and McKnight 2001, Berra et al. 2003, Hirsila et al. 2003, Metzen et al. 2003, Tuckerman et al. 2004, Appelhoff et al. 2004, Fedulova et al. 2007, Tian et al. 2011). The reaction requires molecular oxygen as a substrate and so it is inhibited by hypoxia. PHD2 (EGLN1) is predominantly cytosolic (Metzen et al. 2003) and is the key determinant in the regulation of HIF-alpha subunits by oxygen (Berra et al. 2003).<br>HIF-alpha subunits hydroxylated at proline residues are bound by VHL, an E3 ubiquitin ligase in a complex containing ElonginB, Elongin C, CUL2, and RBX1. VHL ubiquitinates HIF-alpha, resulting in destruction of HIF-alpha by proteolysis. Hypoxia inhibits proline hydroxylation and interaction with VHL, stabilizing HIF-alpha, which transits to the nucleus and activates gene expression.
R-HSA-372708	p130Cas linkage to MAPK signaling for integrins	Integrin signaling is linked to the MAP kinase pathway by recruiting p130cas and Crk to the FAK/Src activation complex.
R-HSA-417957	P2Y receptors	P2Y receptors are a family of purinergic receptors, G protein-coupled receptors stimulated by nucleotides such as ATP, ADP, UTP, UDP and UDP-glucose. To date, 12 P2Y receptors have been cloned in humans (Abbracchio MP et al, 2006; Fischer W and Krugel U, 2007). P2Y receptors are present in almost all human tissues where they exert various biological functions based on their G-protein coupling. Purine nucleotides are involved in a large number of intermediate metabolic pathways, taking part as substrates, products or allosteric factors.
R-HSA-171007	p38MAPK events	NGF induces sustained activation of p38, a member of the MAPK family (Morooka T, Nishida E, 1998). Both p38 and the ERKs appear to be involved in neurite outgrowth and differentiation caused by NGF in PC12 cells. As a matter of fact, PC12 cell differentiation appears to involve activation of both ERK/MAPK and p38. Both ERK/MAPK and p38 pathways contribute to the phosphorylation of the transcription factor CREB and the activation of immediate-early genes (Xing J, 1998). p38 activation by NGF may occur by at least two mechanisms, involving SRC or MEK kinases.
R-HSA-69563	p53-Dependent G1 DNA Damage Response	Most of the damage-induced modifications of p53 are dependent on the ATM kinase. The first link between ATM and p53 was predicted based on the earlier studies that showed that AT cells exhibit a reduced and delayed induction of p53 following exposure to IR (Kastan et al, 1992 and Khanna and Lavin, 1993).<p>Under normal conditions, p53 is a short-lived protein. The MDM2 protein, usually interacts with p53 (Haupt et al, 1997 and Kubbutat et al, 1997), and by virtue of its E3 ubiquitin ligase activity, shuttles p53 to the cytoplasm and mediates its degradation by the ubiquitin-proteasome machinery. Upon detection of DNA damage, the ATM kinase mediates the phosphorylation of the Mdm2 protein to block its interaction with p53. Also, phosphorylation of p53 at multiple loci, by the ATM kinase and by other kinases activated by the ATM kinase, stabilizes and activates the p53 protein.<p>The p53 protein activates the transcription of cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor, p21. p21 inactivates the CyclinE:Cdk2 complexes, and prevent entry of the cell into S phase, leading to G1 arrest. Under severe conditions, the cell may undergo apoptosis. 
R-HSA-69580	p53-Dependent G1/S DNA damage checkpoint	The arrest at G1/S checkpoint is mediated by the action of a widely known tumor suppressor protein, p53. Loss of p53 functions, as a result of mutations in cancer prevent the G1/S checkpoint (Kuerbitz et al, 1992). P53 is rapidly induced in response to damaged DNA. A number of kinases, phosphatases, histone acetylases and ubiquitin-conjugating enzymes regulate the stability as well as transcriptional activity of p53 after DNA damage.
R-HSA-69610	p53-Independent DNA Damage Response	In response to DNA damage due to exposure to ultraviolet light or to ionizing radiation, Cdc25A is phosphorylated by Chk1 or Chk2. The phosphorylation of Cdc25A at ser-123, in response to DNA damage from ionizing radiation is a signal for ubiquitination and subsequent degradation of Cdc25A. The destruction of Cdc25A prevents the normal G1/S transition. Cdc25A is required for the activation of the Cyclin E:Cdk2 complexes via dephosphorylation.<p>Chk1 is activated in response to DNA damage due to uv light. However, the phosphorylation occurs at a different site.
R-HSA-69613	p53-Independent G1/S DNA damage checkpoint	The G1 arrest induced by DNA damage has been ascribed to the transcription factor and tumor suppressor protein p53. To be effective within minutes after DNA damage, induction of the G1 block should exploit transcription and protein synthesis independent mechanisms.<p>Upon exposure to ultraviolet light (UV) or ionizing radiation (IR), the abundance and activity of a protein, Cdc25A, rapidly decreases; this DNA damage response is not dependent on p53. The rapid destruction of Cdc25A phosphatase prevents entry of a cell into S-phase, by maintaining the CyclinE:Cdk2 complexes in their T14Y15 phosphorylated form.
R-HSA-193704	p75 NTR receptor-mediated signalling	Besides signalling through the tyrosine kinase receptors TRK A, B, and C, the mature neurotrophins NGF, BDNF, and NT3/4 signal through their common receptor p75NTR. NGF binding to p75NTR activates a number of downstream signalling events controlling survival, death, proliferation, and axonogenesis, according to the cellular context. p75NTR is devoid of enzymatic activity, and signals by recruiting other proteins to its own intracellular domain. p75 interacting proteins include NRIF, TRAF2, 4, and 6, NRAGE, necdin, SC1, NADE, RhoA, Rac, ARMS, RIP2, FAP and PLAIDD. Here we annotate only the proteins for which a clear involvement in p75NTR signalling was demonstrated.<br>A peculiarity of p75NTR is the ability to bind the pro-neurotrophins proNGF and proBDNF. Proneurotrophins do not associate with TRK receptors, whereas they efficiently signal cell death by apoptosis through p75NTR. The biological action of neurotrophins is thus regulated by proteolytic cleavage, with proforms preferentially activating p75NTR, mediating apoptosis, and mature forms activating TRK receptors, to promote survival. Moreover, the two receptors are utilised to differentially modulate neuronal plasticity. For instance, proBDNF-p75NTR signalling facilitates LTD, long term depression, in the hippocampus (Woo NH, et al, 2005), while BDNF-TRKB signalling promotes LTP (long term potentiation). Many biological observations indicate a functional interaction between p75NTR and TRKA signaling pathways. <br>
R-HSA-193670	p75NTR negatively regulates cell cycle via SC1	SC1 (Schwann Cell factor 1; also called PR domain zinc finger protein 4, PRDM4) interacts with an NGF:p75NTR complex and signals cell cycle arrest by regulating the levels of cyclin E.
R-HSA-209543	p75NTR recruits signalling complexes	NF-kB activation involves recruitment at the cell membrane of several proteins such as RIP2, MYD88, IRAK1, TRAF6, p62 and atypical PKC by the NGF:p75NTR complex.
R-HSA-193697	p75NTR regulates axonogenesis	p75NTR modulates axonal growth by regulating the activity of small GTPases like RHOA and RHOB, that control the state of actin polymerization. The best studied is RHOA. In its active, GTP-bound form, RHOA rigidifies the actin cytoskeleton, thereby inhibiting axonal elongation and causing growth cone collapse. Depending on the ligand that binds to it, p75NTR can either promote or inhibit axonal growth, Neurotrophin binding leads to inhibition of RHOA activity and axonal growth. Axonal growth inhibition is caused by myelin molecules named MDGIs (myelin-derived growth inhibitors), such as NOGO, MAG, OMGP. MDGIs bind to a complex made up of p75NTR and the NOGO receptor, causing RHOA activation and axonal growth inhibition.
R-HSA-193639	p75NTR signals via NF-kB	The NF-kB pathway is an important pro-survival signalling pathway activated by mature NGF, but not BDNF or NT-3, through p75NTR. It is unclear whether TRKA activity also affects NF-kB activation.
R-HSA-168303	Packaging of Eight RNA Segments	For a budding influenza virus to be fully infectious is it essential that it contains a full complement of the eight vRNA segments. Two different models have been proposed for packaging of the vRNPs into newly assembling virus particles; the random incorporation model and the selective incorporation model.<br>The random incorporation model as its name suggests proposes that there is no selection at all on which vRNPs are packaged. It is assumed that each vRNP has equal probability of being packaged, and that if enough vRNPS are packaged a particular percentage of budding virions will receive at least one copy of each genome segment. This model is supported by evidence that infectious virions may possess more than eight vRNPs assuring the presence of a full complement of eight vRNPs in a significant percentage of virus particles. Mathematical analysis of packaging suggested that twelve RNA segments would need to be packaged in order to obtain approximately 10% of virus particles that are fully infectious (Enami, 1991), a number that is compatible with experimental data (Donald, 1954). Due to the low amount of RNA per virion (estimated at 1-2% w/w), enumeration of the precise number of RNAs packaged in a virion is difficult.<br>The selective incorporation model, suggests that each vRNA segment contains a unique "packaging signal" allowing it to act independently, with each vRNA segment being packaged selectively. There is increasing evidence to support the theory of a packaging signal within the coding regions at both the 5' and 3' end of the genomic RNA, with signals being reported for all segments except segment 7 (Ozawa 2007, Muramoto 2006, Fujii 2005, Fujii 2003, Watanabe 2003, Liang 2005). The exact method by which individual vRNP segments are packaged is not known but it has been hypothesized to occur via specific RNA-RNA or protein-RNA interactions. This model is also supported by thin section electron microscopy images of influenza particles that show eight distinct "dots", presumably vRNPs within virus particles (Noda 2006).
R-HSA-171306	Packaging Of Telomere Ends	Multiple steps, including C-strand resection, telomerase-mediated elongation, and C-strand synthesis are involved in processing and maintaining the telomere. Though this module posits a linear transit for the steps, in humans it is not well understood how these steps are coordinated and what other events may be involved.<br><br><br>Telomeric DNA can form higher order structures. Electron microscopy of telomeric DNA isolated from human cells provided evidence for lariat-type structures termed telomeric loops, or t-loops (Griffith et al., 1999). t-loops are proposed to result from the invasion of the 3' G-rich single strand overhang into the double stranded telomeric TTAGGG repeat tract. The function of the t-loop is presumed to be the masking of the 3' telomeric overhang. Multiple protein factors can bind telomeric DNA and likely contribute to dynamic, higher order structures.<br>
R-HSA-141334	PAOs oxidise polyamines to amines	Polyamine oxidases (PAOs), like MAOs, are also FAD-dependant and form aldehydes and hydrogen peroxide. PAOs are approximately 60KDa in size, are monomers and are located in peroxisomes. They act on endogenous polyamines as well as some xenobiotics. The polyamines of the spermine and spermidine families are important physiologically as they mediate cell function and growth and also play a role in programmed cell death. The balance between biosynthesis, degradation and uptake of these polyamines is strictly controlled in cells and the PAO system is one of a set of enzymes that maintains this regulation (Tabor & Tabor 1984, Benedetti 2001).
R-HSA-432047	Passive transport by Aquaporins	Aquaporins (AQP's) are six-pass transmembrane proteins that form channels in membranes. Each monomer contains a central channel formed in part by two asparagine-proline-alanine motifs (NPA boxes) that confer selectivity for water and/or solutes. The monomers assemble into tetramers. Most aquaporins (i.e. AQP0/MIP, AQP1, AQP2, AQP3, AQP4, AQP5, AQP7, AQP8, AQP9, AQP10) passively transport water into and out of cells according to the osmotic gradient across the membrane. Four aquaporins (the aquaglyceroporins AQP3, AQP7, AQP9, AQP10) conduct glycerol, three aquaporins (AQP7, AQP9, AQP10) conduct urea, and one aquaporin (AQP6) conducts anions, especially nitrate. AQP8 also conducts ammonia in addition to water.<br>AQP11 and AQP12, classified as group III aquaporins, were identified as a result of the genome sequencing project and are characterized by having variations in the first NPA box when compared to more traditional aquaporins. Additionally, a conserved cysteine residue is present about 9 amino acids downstream from the second NPA box and this cysteine is considered indicative of group III aquaporins. Purified AQP11 incorporated into liposomes showed water transport. Knockout mice lacking AQP11 had fatal cyst formation in the proximal tubule of the kidney. Exogenously expressed AQP12 showed intracellular localization. AQP12 is expressed exclusively in pancreatic acinar cells.<br>Aquaporins are important in fluid and solute transport in various tissues. In adipocytes, glycerol generated by triglyceride hydrolysis is exported by AQP7 and is imported by liver cells via AQP9. AQP1 plays a role in forming cerebrospinal fluid and AQP1, AQP4, and AQP9 appear to be important in maintaining fluid balance in the brain. AQP0, AQP1, AQP3, AQP4, AQP8, AQP9, and AQP11 play roles in the physiology of the hepatobiliary tract. In the kidney, water and solutes are passed out of the bloodstream and into the proximal tubule via the slit-like structure formed by nephrin in the glomerulus. Water is reabsorbed from the filtrate during its transit through the proximal tubule, the descending loop of Henle, the distal convoluted tubule, and the collecting duct. Aquaporin-1 (AQP1) in the proximal tubule and the descending thin limb of Henle is responsible for about 90% of reabsorption (as estimated from mouse knockouts of AQP1). AQP1 is located on both the apical and basolateral surface of epithelial cells and thus transports water through the epithelium and back into the bloodstream. In the collecting duct epithelial cells have AQP2 on their apical surfaces and AQP3 and AQP4 on their basolateral surfaces to transport water across the epithelium. The permeability of the epithelium is regulated by vasopressin, which activates a signaling cascade leading to the phosphorylation of AQP2 and its translocation from intracellular vesicles to the apical membrane of collecting duct cells.<br>Here, three views of aquaporin-mediated transport have been annotated: a generic view of transport mediated by the various families of aquaporins independent of tissue type, a view of the role of specific aquaporins in maintenance of renal water balance, and a view of the role of specific aquaporins in glycerol transport from adipocytes to the liver.
R-HSA-167290	Pausing and recovery of HIV elongation	After Pol II pauses by back tracking 2 -4 nuleotides on the HIV-1 template, elongation of the HIV-1 transcript resumes.
R-HSA-167238	Pausing and recovery of Tat-mediated HIV elongation	After Pol II pauses by back tracking 2 -4 nuleotides on the HIV-1 template, elongation of the HIV-1 transcript resumes.
R-HSA-5651801	PCNA-Dependent Long Patch Base Excision Repair	Long-patch base excision repair (BER) can proceed through PCNA-dependent DNA strand displacement synthesis by replicative DNA polymerases - DNA polymerase delta complex (POLD) or DNA polymerase epsilon (POLE) complex. The PCNA-dependent branch of long-patch BER may occur in cells in the S phase of the cell cycle, when the replication complexes that contain PCNA, POLD or POLE, RPA and RFC are available. POLB incorporates the first nucleotide at the 3'-end of APEX1-generated single strand break (SSB), thus displacing the damaged AP (abasic) dideoxyribose phosphate residue at the 5'-end of SSB (5'ddRP). PCNA is recruited to BER sites by APEX1 and flap endonuclease FEN1, and loaded onto damaged DNA by RFC. POLD and POLE in complex with PCNA continue the displacement DNA strand synthesis. FEN1 cleaves the displaced DNA strand with the AP residue (5'ddRP), and DNA ligase I (LIG1) ligates the multiple nucleotide patch at the 3' end of the SSB with the FEN1-processed 5'-end of the SSB (Klungland and Lindahl 1997, Stucki et al. 1998, Dianov et al. 1999, Matsumoto et al. 1999, Podlutsky et al. 2001, Dianova et al. 2001, Ranalli et al. 2002).
R-HSA-4086400	PCP/CE pathway	The planar cell polarity (PCP) pathway controls the establishment of polarity within the plane of a sheet of cells. PCP was initially characterized in Drosophila, where it controls the arrangement of hair bristles and photoreceptors in the eye (reviewed in Maung and Jenny, 2011). In vertebrates, PCP regulates convergent extension (CE, a process by which a tissue narrows along one axis and lengthens along a perpendicular one), closure of the neural tube, hair orientation and inner ear development, among others (reviewed in Seifert and Mlodzik, 2007). Studies in Drosophila identified a core group of PCP genes including Frizzled (Fz), Flamingo (Fmi), Van Gogh (Vang), Dishevelled (Dsh), Prickle (Pk) and Diego (Dgo), whose products become asymmetrically localized in the cell upon initiation of PCP (reviewed Maung and Jenny, 2011). Subsequent studies in vertebrates have shown that many of these PCP genes are conserved. <br>Unlike in Drosophila, where the upstream signal for the PCP pathway has not been defined, in vertebrates, a number of so-called 'non-canonical' WNTs have been shown to have roles in PCP processes. WNT5B and WNT11 are both required for CE during gastrulation, and WNT5A physically and genetically interacts with VANGL2 in the inner ear and the developing limb bud (Heisenberg et al, 2000; Rauch et al, 1997; Qian et al, 2007; Gao et al, 2011). WNT ligand can be bound by one of a number of FZD receptors or the single pass transmembrane proteins RYK or ROR, depending on context (reviewed in Green et al, 2008; Fradkin et al, 2010). Although the downstream pathway is not well established, vertebrate PCP signaling appears to work at least in part through DVL, DAAM1 and small GTPases to remodel the actin cytoskeleton (reviewed in Lai et al, 2009; Gao et al, 2012).
R-HSA-389948	PD-1 signaling	The Programmed cell death protein 1 (PD-1) is one of the negative regulators of TCR signaling. PD-1 may exert its effects on cell differentiation and survival directly by inhibiting early activation events that are positively regulated by CD28 or indirectly through IL-2. PD-1 ligation inhibits the induction of the cell survival factor Bcl-xL and the expression of transcription factors associated with effector cell function, including GATA-3, Tbet, and Eomes. PD-1 exerts its inhibitory effects by bringing phosphatases SHP-1 and SHP-2 into the immune synapse, leading to dephosphorylation of CD3-zeta chain, PI3K and AKT.
R-HSA-210990	PECAM1 interactions	PECAM-1/CD31 is a member of the immunoglobulin superfamily (IgSF) and has been implicated to mediate the adhesion and trans-endothelial migration of T-lymphocytes into the vascular wall, T cell activation and angiogenesis. It has six Ig homology domains within its extracellularly and an ITIM motif within its cytoplasmic region. PECAM-1 mediates cellular interactions by both homophilic and heterophilic interactions. The cytoplasmic domain of PECAM-1 contains tyrosine residues which serves as docking sites for recruitment of cytosolic signaling molecules. Under conditions of platelet activation, PECAM-1 is phosphorylated by Src kinase members. The tyrosine residues 663 and 686 are required for recruitment of the SH2 domain containing PTPs.
R-HSA-71336	Pentose phosphate pathway (hexose monophosphate shunt)	The pentose phosphate pathway is responsible for the generation of a substantial fraction of the cytoplasmic NADPH required for biosynthetic reactions, and for the generation of ribose 5-phosphate for nucleotide synthesis. Although the pentose phosphate pathway and glycolysis are distinct, they involve three common intermediates, glucose 6-phosphate, glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate, and fructose 6-phosphate, so the two pathways are interconnected. The pentose phosphate pathway consists of eight reactions:1. Conversion glucose 6-phosphate to D-glucono-1,5-lactone 6-phosphate, with the formation of NADPH; 2. Conversion of D-glucono-1,5-lactone 6-phosphate to 6-phospho-D-gluconate; 3. Conversion of 6-phospho-D-gluconate to ribulose 5-phosphate, with the formation of NADPH; 4. Conversion of ribulose 5-phosphate to xylulose 5-phosphate; 5. Conversion of ribulose 5-phosphate to ribose 5-phosphate; 6. Rearrangement of ribose 5-phosphate and xylulose 5-phosphate to form sedoheptulose 7-phosphate and glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate; 7. Rearrangement of sedoheptulose 7-phosphate and glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate to form erythrose 4-phosphate and fructose 6-phosphate; and 8. Rearrangement of xylulose 5-phosphate and erythrose 4-phosphate to form glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate and fructose-6-phosphate.<P>The oxidative branch of the pentose phosphate pathway, reactions 1-3, generates NADPH and pentose 5-phosphate. The non-oxidative branch of the pathway, reactions 4-8, converts pentose 5-phosphate to other sugars.<P>The overall pathway can operate to generate only NADPH (glucose 6-phosphate is converted to pentose 5-phosphates, which are directed to the synthesis of fructose 6-phosphate and glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate, which in turn are converted back to glucose 6-phosphate). The reactions of the non-oxidative branch can operate to generate net amounts of ribose 5-phosphate with no production of NADPH. Net flux through this network of reactions appears to depend on the metabolic state of the cell and the nature of the biosynthetic reactions underway (Casazza and Veech 1987).<p>G6PD, the enzyme that catalyzes the first reaction of the pathway, is more extensively mutated in human populations than any other enzyme, pehaps because these mutant alleles confer malaria resistance (Luzzatto and Afolayan 1968). Mutations affecting other parts of the pathway are rare, though several have been described and studies of their effects have contributed to our understanding of the normal flux of metabolites through this network of reactions (Wamelink et al. 2008).
R-HSA-6791465	Pentose phosphate pathway disease	Mutant forms of two enzymes of the pentose phosphate pathway have been associated with disease in humans. A mutation in ribose-5-phosphate isomerase (RPIA), which normally mediates the reversible interconversion of D-ribulose-5-phosphate and ribose-5-phosphate, has been associated with a slowly progressive leukoencephalopathy, and mutations in transaldolase 1 (TALDO1), which normally mediates the reversible interconversion of D-fructose 6-phosphate and D-erythrose-4-phosphate to form sedoheptulose-7-phosphate and D-glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate, have been associated with congenital liver disease (Wamelink et al. 2008).
R-HSA-156902	Peptide chain elongation	The mechanism of a peptide bond requires the movement of three protons. First the deprotonation of the ammonium ion generates a reactive amine, allowing a nucleophilic attack on the carbonyl group. This is followed by the loss of a proton from the reaction intermediate, only to be taken up by the oxygen on the leaving group (from the end of the amino acid chain bound to the tRNA in the P-site). The peptide bond formation results in the net loss of one water molecule, leaving a deacylated-tRNA in the P-site, and a nascent polypeptide chain one amino acid larger in the A-site.<br>For the purpose of illustration, the figures used in the section show one amino acid being added to a peptidyl-tRNA with a growing peptide chain.<br>
R-HSA-209952	Peptide hormone biosynthesis	Peptide hormones are peptides that are secreted directly into the blood stream (endocrine hormones). They are synthesized as precursors that require proteolytic processing (not discussed here) to generate the biologically active peptides that mediate neurotransmission and hormonal action. Glycoprotein hormones (those which include carbohydrate side-chains) and the processing of corticotropin are annotated here.
R-HSA-2980736	Peptide hormone metabolism	Peptide hormones are cleaved from larger precursors in the secretory system (endoplasmic reticulum, Golgi apparatus, secretory granules) of the cell. After secretion peptide hormones are modified and degraded by extracellular proteases.
R-HSA-375276	Peptide ligand-binding receptors	These receptors, a subset of the Class A/1 (Rhodopsin-like) family, all bind peptide ligands which include the chemokines, opioids and somatostatins.
R-HSA-381042	PERK regulates gene expression	PERK (EIF2AK3) is a single-pass transmembrane protein located in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) membrane such that the N-terminus of PERK is luminal and the C-terminus is cytosolic. PERK is maintained in an inactive form by interaction of its luminal domain with BiP, an ER chaperone. BiP also binds unfolded proteins and so BiP dissociates from PERK when unfolded proteins accumulate in the ER. Dissociated PERK monomers spontaneously form homodimers and the homodimeric form of PERK possesses kinase activity in its cytosolic C-terminal domain. The kinase specifically phosphorylates the translation factor eIF2alpha at Ser52, resulting in an arrest of translation. Thus translation of proteins targeted to the ER is downregulated. The translation arrest also causes depletion of Cyclin D1, a rapidly turned over protein. The depletion of Cyclin D1 in turn causes arrest of the cell cycle in G1 phase.
R-HSA-390918	Peroxisomal lipid metabolism	In humans, the catabolism of phytanate, pristanate, and very long chain fatty acids as well as the first four steps of the biosynthesis of plasmalogens are catalyzed by peroxisomal enzymes. Defects in any of these enzymes or in the assembly of peroxisomes are associated with severe developmental disorders (Wanders and Watherham 2006).
R-HSA-211945	Phase 1 - Functionalization of compounds	Phase 1 of metabolism is concerned with <i><b>functionalization</b></i>, that is the introduction or exposure of functional groups on the chemical structure of a compound. This provides a 'handle' for phase 2 conjugating species with which to react with. Many xenobiotics are lipophilic and almost chemically inert (e.g. PAHs) so would not necessarily undergo a phase 2 reaction. Making them more chemically reactive would facilitate their excretion but also increases their chance of reacting with cellular macromolecules (e.g. proteins, DNA). There is a fine balance between producing a more reactive metabolite and conjugation reactions.<br>There are two groups of enzymes in phase 1 - oxidoreductases and hydrolases. Oxidoreductases introduce an oxygen atom into or remove electrons from their substrates. The major oxidoreductase enzyme system is called the P450 monooxygenases. Other systems include flavin-containing monooxygenases (FMO), cyclooxygenases (COX) and monoamine oxidases (MAO). Hydrolases hydrolyse esters, amides, epoxides and glucuronides.
R-HSA-156580	Phase II conjugation	Phase II of biotransformation is concerned with <b><i>conjugation</i></b>, that is using groups from cofactors to react with functional groups present or introduced from phase I on the compound. The enzymes involved are a set of transferases which perform the transfer of the cofactor group to the substrate. The resultant conjugation results in greatly increasing the excretory potential of compounds. Although most conjugations result in pharmacological inactivation or detoxification, some can result in bioactivation. Most of the phase II enzymes are located in the cytosol except UDP-glucuronosyltransferases (UGT), which are microsomal. Phase II reactions are typically much faster than phase I reactions therefore the rate-limiting step for biotransformation of a compound is usually the phase I reaction.<br>Phase II metabolism can deal with all the products of phase I metabolism, be they reactive (Type I substrate) or unreactive/poorly active (Type II substrate) compounds. With the exception of glutathione, the conjugating species needs to be made chemically reactive after synthesis. The availability of the cofactor in the synthesis may be a rate-limiting factor in some phase II pathways as it may prevent the formation of enough conjugating species to deal with the substrate or it's metabolite. As many substrates and/or their metabolites are chemically reactive, their continued presence may lead to toxicity.
R-HSA-71182	Phenylalanine and tyrosine catabolism	The first reaction in this pathway converts phenylalanine to tyrosine, coupled to the conversion of tetrahydrobiopterin to 4a-hydroxytetrahydrobiopterin, catalyzed by phenylalanine hydroxylase. (Deficiencies in this enzyme are responsible for the commonest form of phenylketonuria (PKU) in humans.) This reaction functions both as the first step in the pathway by which the body disposes of excess phenylalanine, and as a source of the amino acid tyrosine. The next two reactions are responsible for the regeneration of tetrahydrobiopterin from 4a-hydroxytetrahydrobiopterin. The following five reactions convert tyrosine to fumarate, an intermediate in the citric acid cycle, and acetoacetate, a ketone body.
R-HSA-2160456	Phenylketonuria	Phenylalanine hydroxylase (PAH) normally catalyzes the conversion of phenylalanine to tyrosine. In the absence of functional PAH, phenylalanine accumulates to high levels in the blood and is converted to phenylpyruvate and phenyllactate (Clemens et al. 1990; Langenbeck et al. 1992; Mitchell 2013). The extent of these conversions is modulated by genetic factors distinct from PAH, as siblings with the identical PAH defect can produce different amounts of them (Treacy et al. 1996).<p>Both L-amino acid oxidase (Boulland et al. 2004) and Kynurenine--oxoglutarate transaminase 3 (Han et al. 2004) can catalyze the conversion of phenylalanine to phenylpyruvate and lactate dehydrogenase can catalyze the conversion of the latter molecule to phenyllactate (Meister 1950), in reactions not annotated here.
R-HSA-2393930	Phosphate bond hydrolysis by NUDT proteins	Enzymes that belong to the NUDT (Nudix) superfamily catalyze the hydrolysis of phosphodiester bonds in molecules including nucleoside triphosphates and diphosphates and nucleotide sugars. Family members are defined by the presence of an amino acid sequence motif shared with the E. coli MutT gene product, and are involved in diverse physiological processes (Mildvan et al. 2005; McLennan 2006).<p>The hydrolysis of nucleoside di and triphosphates whose purine bases have been oxidized or deaminated may protect the cell from the mutational damage that would occur if modified deoxyribonucleotides were incorporated into DNA and from the aberrant protein synthesis that would occur if modified ribonucleotides were incorporated into mRNA (Iyama et al. 2010; Takagi et al. 2012). The hydrolysis of ADP ribose may prevent the aberrant spontaneous ADP ribosylation of cellular proteins that could occur were this molecule to accumulate to high levels in the cell (Perraud et al. 2003; Shen et al. 2003). This hypothesis is further supported by the demonstration that mice lacking NUDT1 show an increased lifetime incidence of liver and other tumors compared to normal controls, and that rapidly metabolizing tumor cells in culture are killed under conditions where synthesis of NUDT1 protein is suppressed or its catalytic activity is inhibited (Gad et al. 2014; Huber et al. 2014).
R-HSA-111995	phospho-PLA2 pathway	Phospholipase A2 (PLA2) enzymes hydrolyze arachidonic acid (AA) from the sn-2 position of phospholipids. AA is a precursor of eicosanoids, lipid mediators involved in inflammtory responses. PLA2 enzymes function as regulators of phospholipid acyl turnover, either as housekeepers for membrane repair or for the production of imflammatory lipid mediators. There are diverse forms of PLA2 enyzmes including secretory (sPLA2), calcium-independent and cytosolic (cPLA2). The cPLA2 form which mediates arachidonic acid release is annotated here.
R-HSA-5654219	Phospholipase C-mediated cascade: FGFR1	Phospholipase C-gamma (PLC-gamma) is a substrate of the fibroblast growth factor receptor (FGFR) and other receptors with tyrosine kinase activity. It is known that the src homology region 2 (SH2 domain) of PLC-gamma and of other signaling molecules (such as GTPase-activating protein and phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase-associated p85) direct their binding toward autophosphorylated tyrosine residues of the FGFR. Recruitment of PLC-gamma results in its phosphorylation and activation by the receptor. Activated PLC-gamma hydrolyzes phosphatidyl inositol[4,5] P2 to form the second messengers diacylglycerol (DAG) and Ins [1,4,5]P3, which stimulate calcium release and activation of calcium/calmodulin dependent kinases.<br>
R-HSA-5654221	Phospholipase C-mediated cascade; FGFR2	Phospholipase C-gamma (PLC-gamma) is a substrate of the fibroblast growth factor receptor (FGFR) and other receptors with tyrosine kinase activity. It is known that the src homology region 2 (SH2 domain) of PLC-gamma and of other signaling molecules (such as GTPase-activating protein and phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase-associated p85) direct their binding toward autophosphorylated tyrosine residues of the FGFR. Recruitment of PLC-gamma results in its phosphorylation and activation by the receptor. Activated PLC-gamma hydrolyzes phosphatidyl inositol[4,5] P2 to form the second messengers diacylglycerol (DAG) and Ins [1,4,5]P3, which stimulate calcium release and activation of calcium/calmodulin dependent kinases.<br>
R-HSA-5654227	Phospholipase C-mediated cascade; FGFR3	Phospholipase C-gamma (PLC-gamma) is a substrate of the fibroblast growth factor receptor (FGFR) and other receptors with tyrosine kinase activity. It is known that the src homology region 2 (SH2 domain) of PLC-gamma and of other signaling molecules (such as GTPase-activating protein and phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase-associated p85) direct their binding toward autophosphorylated tyrosine residues of the FGFR. Recruitment of PLC-gamma results in its phosphorylation and activation by the receptor. Activated PLC-gamma hydrolyzes phosphatidyl inositol[4,5] P2 to form the second messengers diacylglycerol (DAG) and Ins [1,4,5]P3, which stimulate calcium release and activation of calcium/calmodulin dependent kinases.<br>
R-HSA-5654228	Phospholipase C-mediated cascade; FGFR4	Phospholipase C-gamma (PLC-gamma) is a substrate of the fibroblast growth factor receptor (FGFR) and other receptors with tyrosine kinase activity. It is known that the src homology region 2 (SH2 domain) of PLC-gamma and of other signaling molecules (such as GTPase-activating protein and phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase-associated p85) direct their binding toward autophosphorylated tyrosine residues of the FGFR. Recruitment of PLC-gamma results in its phosphorylation and activation by the receptor. Activated PLC-gamma hydrolyzes phosphatidyl inositol[4,5] P2 to form the second messengers diacylglycerol (DAG) and Ins [1,4,5]P3, which stimulate calcium release and activation of calcium/calmodulin dependent kinases.<br>
R-HSA-1483257	Phospholipid metabolism	Phospholipids contain a polar head group and two long-chain fatty acyl moieties, one of which is generally unsaturated. The head group is a glycerol or serine phosphate attached to a polar group such as choline. These molecules are a major constituent of cellular membranes, where their diverse structures and asymmetric distributions play major roles in determining membrane properties (Dowhan 1997). The four major classes of phospholipids in human plasma membranes are phosphatidylethanolamine, phosphatidylserine, phosphatidylcholine, and sphingomyelin. The first three are derivatives of glycerol while sphingomyelin is a derivative of serine.<p>Here, pathways for the metabolism of glycerophospholipids, phosphphatidylinositol (PI), and sphingolipids are annotated.
R-HSA-202427	Phosphorylation of CD3 and TCR zeta chains	Prior to T cell receptor (TCR) stimulation, CD4/CD8 associated Lck remains seperated from the TCR and is maintained in an inactive state by the action of Csk. Csk phosphorylates the negative regulatory tyrosine of Lck and inactivates the Lck kinase domain. <p><br><br>Upon TCR stimulation, CD4/CD8 associated Lck co-localizes with the TCR leading to the phosphorylation of the CD3 and TCR subunit. Lck becomes activated by way of CD45-mediated dephosphorylation of negative regulatory tyrosine residues. The presence to PAG-bound Csk is further reduced via the dephosphorylation of PAG (step 1). <p><br><br>Lck is further activated by trans-autophosphorylation on the tyrosine residue on its activation loop (step 2). Active Lck further phosphorylates the tyrosine residues on CD3 chains. The signal-transducing CD3 delta/epsilon/gamma and TCR zeta chains contain a critical signaling motif known as the immunoreceptor tyrosine-based activation motif (ITAM). The two critical tyrosines of each ITAM motif are phosphorylated by Lck (step 3).
R-HSA-176417	Phosphorylation of Emi1	The phosphorylation of Emi1, which is required for its degradation in mitosis, appears to involve both Plk1 and Cdk1.
R-HSA-69200	Phosphorylation of proteins involved in G1/S transition by active Cyclin E:Cdk2 complexes	The G1/S transition is facilitated by Cyclin E:Cdk2-mediated phoshorylation of proteins including Rb and Cyclin Kinase Inhibitors (CKIs).
R-HSA-170145	Phosphorylation of proteins involved in the G2/M transition by Cyclin A:Cdc2 complexes	Cyclin A:Cdc2 complexes are detected in the nucleus earlier that cyclin B1:Cdc2 complexes and may play a role in the initial events in prophase. Inactivation of Cdc25B by proteasome-mediated degradation is dependent upon cyclin A:Cdc2-mediated phosphorylation (Cans et al, 1999)
R-HSA-176412	Phosphorylation of the APC/C	Phosphorylation of APC subunits is required for Cdc20 mediated activation by of the APC/C at the metaphase anaphase transition (Kramer et al., 2000). While the kinases responsible for phosphorylation in vivo have not been determined with certainty, both Plk1 and Cyclin B:Cdc2 have been implicated in this process.
R-HSA-4839743	phosphorylation site mutants of CTNNB1 are not targeted to the proteasome by the destruction complex	Mutations in exon 3 of the beta-catenin gene have been identified in a number of human cancers (Morin et al, 1997; Rubinfeld et al, 1997; reviewed in Polakis, 2000; Polakis, 2007). These mutations generally affect serine and threonine residues (S33, S37, T41, S45) that are the sites of phosphorylation by CK1 and GSK3; phosphorylation of these residues is required for the ubiquitin-mediated degradation of beta-catenin. Hence mutation of these phospho-acceptor sites stabilizes beta-catenin, allowing it to accumulate, translocate to the nucleus and activate WNT signaling through association with LEF1/TCF DNA binding partners (Hart et al, 1999; Peifer and Polakis, 2000; Laurent-Puig et al, 2001; reviewed in Saito-Diaz et al, 2013).
R-HSA-1483196	PI and PC transport between ER and Golgi membranes	The phosphatidylinositol transfer protein beta isoform (PITPNB) bound to phosphatidylinositol (PI) complex transports from the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) membrane to the Golgi membrane, where phosphatidylcholine (PC) is exchanged for PI. PITPNB now in complex with PC transports back to the ER membrane where PI is now exchanged for PC, and the cycle repeats. This process has been characterized in detail in bovine and rodent model systems (e.g., Wirtz et al. 2006; Ghosh and Bankaitis 2011), which provide a framework for organizing the more limited data available for the very well conserved human proteins and processes( Carvou et al. 2010, Shadan et al. 2008).
R-HSA-1483255	PI Metabolism	Phosphatidylinositol (PI), a membrane phospholipid, can be reversibly phosphorylated at the 3, 4, and 5 positions of the inositol ring to generate seven phosphoinositides: phosphatidylinositol 3-phosphate (PI3P), phosphatidylinositol 4-phosphate (PI4P), phosphatidylinositol 5-phosphate (PI5P), phosphatidylinositol 3,4-bisphosphate PI(3,4)P2, phosphatidylinositol 4,5-bisphosphate PI(4,5)P2, phosphatidylinositol 3,5-bisphosphate PI(3,5)P2, and phosphatidylinositol 3,4,5-trisphosphate (PI(3,4,5)P3). These seven phosphoinositides, which are heterogeneously distributed within cells, can serve as signature components of different intracellular compartment membranes and so help to mediate specificity of membrane interactions. Phosphoinositide levels are tightly regulated spatially and temporally by the action of various kinases and phosphatases whilst PI(4,5)P2 is also a substrate for phospholipase C. The differential localisation of each of these enzymes on specific compartment membranes ensures maintenance of the heterogeneous distribution of phosphoinositides despite the continuous membrane flow from one compartment to another.<br><br>PI is primarily synthesised in the endoplasmic reticulum from where the phospholipid is exported to other compartments via membrane traffic or via cytosolic phospholipid transfer proteins. Phosphorylation of PI to PI4P primarily occurs in the Golgi, where PI4P plays an important role in the biogenesis of transport vesicles such as the secretory vesicle involved in its transport to the plasma membrane. At this place, PI4P has a major function acting as a precursor of PI(4,5)P2, which is located predominantly at this membrane. PI(4,5)P2 binds and regulates a wide range of proteins that function on the cell surface and serves as a precursor for second messengers. Additionally, it helps define this membrane as a target for secretory vesicles, functions as a coreceptor in endocytic processes, and functions as a cofactor for actin nucleation.<br><br>At the plasma membrane, PI(4,5)P2 is further phosphorylated to PI(3,4,5)P3, another phosphoinositide with important signalling functions including stimulating cell survival and proliferation. The inositol 3-phosphatase, phosphatase and tensin homolog (PTEN) regenerates PI (4,5)P2, while the 5-phosphatases convert PI(3,4,5)P3 into the phosphoinositide, PI(3,4)P2, propagating the signal initiated by PI(3,4,5)P3. PI(3,4)P2 is further dephosphorylated in the endocytic pathway by inositol 4-phosphatases to PI3P, the signature phosphoinositide of the early endosomal compartment and a ligand for numerous endosomal proteins. However, the bulk of PI3P is generated directly in the endosomes by phosphorylation of PI. The subsequent endosomal phosphorylation of PI3P to PI(3,5)P2 is believed to generate docking sites for recruitment of cytosolic factors responsible for the control of outgoing traffic from the endosomes. The main localisation and function of the low abundance phosphoinositide PI5P, that can be generated by several pathways, remains to be determined (Krauss & Haucke 2007, Leventis & Grinstein 2010, Roth 2004, Gees et al. 2010, De Matteis & Godi 2004, van Meer et al. 2008, Vicinanza et al. 2008, Lemmon 2008, Kutaleladze 2010, Robinson & Dixon 2006, Blero et al. 2007, Liu & Bankaitis 2010, McCrea & De Camilli 2009, Vicinanza et al. 2008, Di Paolo & De Camilli, 2006).
R-HSA-5654689	PI-3K cascade:FGFR1	The ability of growth factors to protect from apoptosis is primarily due to the activation of the AKT survival pathway. P-I-3-kinase dependent activation of PDK leads to the activation of AKT which in turn affects the activity or expression of pro-apoptotic factors, which contribute to protection from apoptosis. AKT activation also blocks the activity of GSK-3b which could lead to additional antiapoptotic signals.
R-HSA-5654695	PI-3K cascade:FGFR2	The ability of growth factors to protect from apoptosis is primarily due to the activation of the AKT survival pathway. P-I-3-kinase dependent activation of PDK leads to the activation of AKT which in turn affects the activity or expression of pro-apoptotic factors, which contribute to protection from apoptosis. AKT activation also blocks the activity of GSK-3b which could lead to additional antiapoptotic signals.
R-HSA-5654710	PI-3K cascade:FGFR3	The ability of growth factors to protect from apoptosis is primarily due to the activation of the AKT survival pathway. P-I-3-kinase dependent activation of PDK leads to the activation of AKT which in turn affects the activity or expression of pro-apoptotic factors, which contribute to protection from apoptosis. AKT activation also blocks the activity of GSK-3b which could lead to additional antiapoptotic signals.
R-HSA-5654720	PI-3K cascade:FGFR4	The ability of growth factors to protect from apoptosis is primarily due to the activation of the AKT survival pathway. P-I-3-kinase dependent activation of PDK leads to the activation of AKT which in turn affects the activity or expression of pro-apoptotic factors, which contribute to protection from apoptosis. AKT activation also blocks the activity of GSK-3b which could lead to additional antiapoptotic signals.
R-HSA-1963642	PI3K events in ERBB2 signaling	ERBB2:ERBB3 and ERBB2:ERBB4cyt1 heterodimers activate PI3K signaling by direct binding of PI3K regulatory subunit p85 (Yang et al. 2007, Cohen et al. 1996, Kaushansky et al. 2008) to phosphorylated tyrosine residues in the C-tail of ERBB3 (Y1054, Y1197, Y1222, Y1224, Y1276 and Y1289) and ERBB4 CYT1 isoforms (Y1056 in JM-A CYT1 isoform and Y1046 in JM-B CYT1 isoform). Regulatory subunit p85 subsequently recruits catalytic subunit p110 of PI3K, resulting in the formation of active PI3K, conversion of PIP2 to PIP3, and PIP3-mediated activation of AKT signaling (Junttila et al. 2009, Kainulainen et al. 2000). Heterodimers of ERBB2 and EGFR recruit PI3K indirectly, through GRB2:GAB1 complex (Jackson et al. 2004), which again leads to PIP3-mediated activation of AKT signaling.
R-HSA-1250342	PI3K events in ERBB4 signaling	The CYT1 isoforms of ERBB4 possess a C-tail tyrosine residue that, upon trans-autophosphorylation, serves as a docking site for the p85 alpha subunit of PI3K - PIK3R1 (Kaushansky et al. 2008, Cohen et al. 1996). Binding of PIK3R1 to CYT1 isoforms of ERBB4 is followed by recruitment of the p110 catalytic subunit of PI3K (PIK3CA), leading to assembly of an active PI3K complex that converts PIP2 to PIP3 and activates AKT signaling (Kainulainen et al. 2000).
R-HSA-198203	PI3K/AKT activation	PI3K/AKT signalling is a major regulator of neuron survival. It blocks cell death by both impinging on the cytoplasmic cell death machinery and by regulating the expression of genes involved in cell death and survival. In addition, it may also use metabolic pathways to regulate cell survival.The PI3K/AKT pathway also affects axon diameter and branching (Marcus et al, 2002) and regulates small G proteins like RhoA (Vanhaesebroeck, B and Waterman, MD, 1999), which control the behaviour of the F-actin cytoskeleton. Moreover, through its connection with the TOR pathway, it promotes translation of a subset of mRNAs. 
R-HSA-2219528	PI3K/AKT Signaling in Cancer	Class IA PI3K is a heterodimer of a p85 regulatory subunit (encoded by PIK3R1, PIK3R2 or PIK3R3) and a p110 catalytic subunit (encoded by PIK3CA, PIK3CB or PIK3CD). In the absence of activating signals, the regulatory subunit stabilizes the catalytic subunit while inhibiting its activity. The complex becomes activated when extracellular signals stimulate the phosphorylation of the cytoplasmic domains of transmembrane receptors or receptor-associated proteins. The p85 regulatory subunit binds phosphorylated motifs of activator proteins, which induces a conformational change that relieves p85-mediated inhibition of the p110 catalytic subunit and enables PI3K to phosphorylate PIP2 to form PIP3. The phosphoinositide kinase activity of PI3K is opposed by the phosphoinositide phosphatase activity of PTEN. <br><br>PIP3 acts as a messenger that recruits PDPK1 (PDK1) and AKT (AKT1, AKT2 or AKT3) to the plasma membrane. PDPK1 also possesses a low affinity for PIP2, so small amounts of PDPK1 are always present at the membrane. Binding of AKT to PIP3 induces a conformational change that enables TORC2 complex to phosphorylate AKT at a conserved serine residue (S473 in AKT1). Phosphorylation at the serine residue enables AKT to bind to PDPK1 and exposes a conserved threonine residue (T308) that is phosphorylated by PDPK1. AKT phosphorylated at both serine and threonine residues dissociates from the plasma membrane and acts as a serine/threonine kinase that phosphorylates a number of cytosolic and nuclear targets involved in regulation of cell metabolism, survival and gene expression. For a recent review, please refer to Manning and Cantley, 2007. <br> Signaling by PI3K/AKT is frequently constitutively activated in cancer. This activation can be via gain-of-function mutations in PI3KCA (encoding catalytic subunit p110alpha), PIK3R1 (encoding regulatory subunit p85alpha) and AKT1. The PI3K/AKT pathway can also be constitutively activated by loss-of-function mutations in tumor suppressor genes such as PTEN. <br> Gain-of-function mutations activate PI3K signaling by diverse mechanisms. Mutations affecting the helical domain of PIK3CA and mutations affecting nSH2 and iSH2 domains of PIK3R1 impair inhibitory interactions between these two subunits while preserving their association. Mutations in the catalytic domain of PIK3CA enable the kinase to achieve an active conformation. PI3K complexes with gain-of-function mutations therefore produce PIP3 and activate downstream AKT in the absence of growth factors (Huang et al. 2007, Zhao et al. 2005, Miled et al. 2007, Horn et al. 2008, Sun et al. 2010, Jaiswal et al. 2009, Zhao and Vogt 2010, Urick et al. 2011). While AKT1 gene copy number, expression level and phosphorylation are often increased in cancer, only one low frequency point mutation has been repeatedly reported in cancer and functionally studied. This mutation represents a substitution of a glutamic acid residue with lysine at position 17 of AKT1, and acts by enabling AKT1 to bind PIP2. PIP2-bound AKT1 is phosphorylated by TORC2 complex and by PDPK1 that is always present at the plasma membrane, due to low affinity for PIP2. Therefore, E17K substitution abrogates the need for PI3K in AKT1 activation (Carpten et al. 2007, Landgraf et al. 2008). <br> Loss-of-function mutations affecting the phosphatase domain of PTEN are frequently found in sporadic cancers (Kong et al. 1997, Lee et al. 1999, Han et al. 2000), as well as in PTEN hamartoma tumor syndromes (PHTS) (Marsh et al. 1998). PTEN can also be inactivated by gene deletion or epigenetic silencing, or indirectly by overexpression of microRNAs that target PTEN mRNA (Huse et al. 2009). Cells with deficient PTEN function have increased levels of PIP3, and therefore increased AKT activity. For a recent review, please refer to Hollander et al. 2011.<br> Because of their clear involvement in human cancers, PI3K and AKT are targets of considerable interest in the development of small molecule inhibitors. Although none of the currently available inhibitors display preference for mutant variants of PIK3CA or AKT, several inhibitors targeting the wild-type kinases are undergoing clinical trials. These include dual PI3K/mTOR inhibitors, class I PI3K inhibitors, pan-PI3K inhibitors, and pan-AKT inhibitors. While none have yet been approved for clinical use, these agents show promise for future therapeutics. In addition, isoform-specific PI3K and AKT inhibitors are currently being developed, and may provide more specific treatments along with reduced side-effects. For a recent review, please refer to Liu et al. 2009.
R-HSA-5205685	Pink/Parkin Mediated Mitophagy	This is the process of selective removal of damaged mitochondria by autophagosomes and subsequent catabolism by lysosomes. In healthy mitochondria, PINK1 is imported to the inner mitochondrial membrane, presumably through the TOM/TIM complex. The TIM complex associated protease, mitochondrial MPP, cleaves PINK1 mitochondrial targeting sequence (MTS). PINK1 may be cleaved by the inner membrane presenilin associated rhomboid like protease (PARL) and ultimately proteolytically degraded. Loss of membrane potential in damaged mitochondria prevents the import of the PTEN induced putative kinase 1 (PINK1) which accumulates in the defective mitochondria triggering the recruitment of the E3 ubiquitin protein ligase (Parkin). Once on the mitochondria, Parkin promotes the ubiquitination of mitochondrial substrates embedded in the OMM such as the mitofusin Mitochondrial Assembly Regulatory Factor (MARF), mitofusin 1 and 2 (Mfn1, 2) and the Voltage Dependent Anion Channel 1 (VDAC1). After the ubiquitination events, p62 is recruited to mitochondria, binding the Parkin ubiquitinated substrates, linking the ubiquitinated substrates to the Microtubule associated protein Autophagy marker Light Chain 3 (LC3). Targeting the entire mitochondria for autophagic degradation. The recruitment of LC3 complexes with the autophagosome membrane and the AuTophaGy proteins 5 12 (Atg5 Atg12) complex. The mitochondria is engulfed after the isolation membrane grows to a sufficient size to engulf the mitochondria. Once autophagic vesicle formation is complete, vesicle fusion with lysosomes occurs to form autophagolysosomes in which the lysosomal hydrolases (cathepsins and lipases) degrade the intra autophagosomal content. Cathepsin also degrades LC3 on the intra autophagosomal surface of the autophagic vesicle.
R-HSA-1257604	PIP3 activates AKT signaling	Signaling by AKT is one of the key outcomes of receptor tyrosine kinase (RTK) activation. AKT is activated by the cellular second messenger PIP3, a phospholipid that is generated by PI3K. In ustimulated cells, PI3K class IA enzymes reside in the cytosol as inactive heterodimers composed of p85 regulatory subunit and p110 catalytic subunit. In this complex, p85 stabilizes p110 while inhibiting its catalytic activity. Upon binding of extracellular ligands to RTKs, receptors dimerize and undergo autophosphorylation. The regulatory subunit of PI3K, p85, is recruited to phosphorylated cytosolic RTK domains either directly or indirectly, through adaptor proteins, leading to a conformational change in the PI3K IA heterodimer that relieves inhibition of the p110 catalytic subunit. Activated PI3K IA phosphorylates PIP2, converting it to PIP3; this reaction is negatively regulated by PTEN phosphatase. PIP3 recruits AKT to the plasma membrane, allowing TORC2 to phosphorylate a conserved serine residue of AKT. Phosphorylation of this serine induces a conformation change in AKT, exposing a conserved threonine residue that is then phosphorylated by PDPK1 (PDK1). Phosphorylation of both the threonine and the serine residue is required to fully activate AKT. The active AKT then dissociates from PIP3 and phosphorylates a number of cytosolic and nuclear proteins that play important roles in cell survival and metabolism. For a recent review of AKT signaling, please refer to Manning and Cantley, 2007. 
R-HSA-1660502	PIPs transport between early and late endosome membranes	The maturation of the early endosome compartment into a late endosome is triggered by the presence of phosphoinositide phosphatidylinositol 3,5-bisphosphate (PI(3,5)P2) (Cabezas et al. 2006, Ikonomov et al. 2006, Ikonomov et al. 2001).
R-HSA-1660537	PIPs transport between early endosome and Golgi membranes	The phosphoinositide phosphatidylinositol 3,5-bisphosphate (PI(3,5)P2) is exported from the early endosome membrane to the Golgi membrane (Rutherford et al. 2006).
R-HSA-1660510	PIPs transport between Golgi and plasma membranes	A secretory vesicle containing primarily containing the phospholipid phosphatidylinositol 4-phosphate (PI4P) is exported from the Golgi membrane to the plasma membrane (Szentpetery et al. 2010, Godi et al. 2004, Hammond et al. 2009).
R-HSA-1660508	PIPs transport between late endosome and Golgi membranes	The phosphoinositide phosphatidylinositol 3,5-bisphosphate (PI(3,5)P2) is exported from the late endosome membrane to the Golgi membrane (Rutherford et al. 2006).
R-HSA-1660524	PIPs transport between plasma and early endosome membranes	The phosphoinositide phosphatidylinositol 3,4-bisphosphate (PI(3,4)P2) translocates from the plasma membrane to the early endosome membrane (Watt et al. 2004, Ivetac et al. 2005).
R-HSA-5601884	PIWI-interacting RNA (piRNA) biogenesis	In germ cells of humans and mice, precursors of PIWI-interacting RNAs (piRNAs) are transcribed from a few hundred sequence clusters, as well as individual transposons, intergenic regions, and genes in the genome. These longer transcripts are processed to yield piRNAs of 26-30 nucleotides independently of DICER, the enzyme responsible for microRNAs (miRNAs) and small interfering RNAs (siRNAs) (reviewed in Girard and Hannon 2008, Siomi et al. 2011, Ishizu et al. 2012, Pillai and Chuma 2012, Bortvin 2013, Chuma and Nakano 2013, Sato and Siomi 2013). The initial step in processing long transcripts to piRNAs is cleavage by PLD6 (MitoPLD), which generates the mature 5' end. The cleavage products of PLD6 are bound by either PIWIL1 (HIWI, MIWI) or PIWIL2 (HILI, MILI) in complexes with several other proteins. The 3' end is trimmed by an unknown exonuclease to generate the mature piRNA. PIWIL1:piRNA complexes appear to be involved in post-transcriptional silencing in the cytosol while PIWIL2:piRNA complexes generate further piRNAs from transposon transcripts and other transcripts in the cytosol. Cleavage products from PIWIL2:piRNA may be loaded into either PIWIL2 or PIWIL4 (HIWI2, MIWI2). Loading into PIWIL2 forms a step in a cytosolic amplification loop called the "ping-pong cycle" which yields further PIWIL2:piRNA complexes from cleaved precursor RNAs. Loading into PIWIL4 yields a complex also containing TDRD9 that translocates to the nucleus and directs DNA methylation of cognate loci, causing transcriptional silencing during spermatogenesis. Transcriptional silencing by piRNAs is necessary to limit transposition of endogenous transposons such as L1 elements in the genome.
R-HSA-163615	PKA activation	A number of inactive tetrameric PKA holoenzymes are produced by the combination of homo- or heterodimers of the different regulatory subunits associated with two catalytic subunits. When cAMP binds to two specific binding sites on the regulatory subunits, these undergo a conformational change that causes the dissociation of a dimer of regulatory subunits bound to four cAMP from two monomeric, catalytically active PKA subunits.
R-HSA-164378	PKA activation in glucagon signalling	Adenylate cyclase catalyses the synthesis of cyclic AMP (cAMP) from ATP. In the absence of cAMP, protein kinase A (PKA) exists as inactive tetramers of two catalytic subunits and two regulatory subunits. cAMP binding to PKA tetramers causes them to dissociate and release their catalytic subunits as active monomers. Four isoforms of the regulatory subunit are known, that differ in their tissue specificity and functional characteristics, but the specific isoform activated in response to glucagon signaling has not yet been identified.
R-HSA-111931	PKA-mediated phosphorylation of CREB	Cyclic adenosine 3',5'-monophosphate (cAMP) induces gene transcription through activation of cAMP-dependent protein kinase (PKA), and subsequent phosphorylation of the transcription factor cAMP response element-binding protein, CREB, at serine-133.
R-HSA-163358	PKA-mediated phosphorylation of key metabolic factors	Upon dissociation of protein kinase A (PKA) tetramers in the presence of cAMP, the released PKA catalytic monomers phosphorylate specific serine and threonine residues of several metabolic enzymes. These target enzymes include glycogen phosphorylase kinase, glycogen synthase and PF2K-Pase. PKA also phosphorylates ChREBP (Carbohydrate Response Element Binding Protein), preventing its movement into the nucleus and thus its function as a positive transcription factor for genes involved in glycolytic and lipogenic reactions.
R-HSA-109703	PKB-mediated events	PKB and PDK1 are activated via membrane-bound PIP3. Activated PDK1 phosphorylates PKB, which in turn phosphorylates PDE3B. The latter hydrolyses cAMP to 5'AMP, depleting cAMP pools.
R-HSA-3214841	PKMTs methylate histone lysines	Lysine methyltransferases (KMTs) and arginine methyltransferases (RMTs) have a common mechanism of catalysis. Both families transfer a methyl group from a common donor, S-adenosyl-L-methionine (SAM), to the nitrogen atom on the epsilon-amino group of lysine or arginine (Smith & Denu 2009) using a bimolecular nucleophillic substitution (SN2) methyl transfer mechanism (Smith & Denu 2009, Zhang & Bruice 2008). All human KMTs except DOT1L (KMT4) (Feng et al. 2002, van Leeuwen et al. 2002, Lacoste et al. 2002) have a ~130 amino acid catalytic domain referred to as the SET domain (Del Rizzo & Trievel 2011, Dillon et al. 2005, Herz et al. 2013). <br><br>Some KMTs selectively methylate a particular lysine residue on a specific histone type. The extent of this methylation (mono-, di- or tri-methylation) also can be stringent (Herz et al. 2013, Copeland et al. 2009). Many KMTs also have non-histone substrates (Herz et al 2013), which are not discussed in this module.<br><br>The coordinates of post-translational modifications represented and described here follow UniProt standard practice whereby coordinates refer to the translated protein before any processing. Histone literature typically refers to specific residues by numbers which are determined after the initiating methionine has been removed. Therefore the coordinates of post-translated residues in the Reactome database and described here are frequently +1 when compared to the histone literature.<br><br>SET domain-containing proteins are classified in one of 7 families (Dillon et al. 2005). First to be discovered were the SUV39 family named after founding member SUV39H1 (KMT1A), which selectively methylates lysine-10 of histone H3 (H3K9) (Rea et al. 2000). Family member EHMT2 (KMT1C, G9A) is the predominant H3K9 methyltransferase in mammals (Tachibana et al. 2002). SETDB1 (KMT1E, ESET) also predominantly methylates H3K9, most effectively when complexed with ATF7IP (MCAF, hAM) (Wang et al. 2003). <br><br>SETD2 (KMT3A, HYPB), a member of the SET2 family, specifically methylates histone H3 lysine-37 (H3K36) (Sun et al. 2005). WHSC1 (KMT3G, NSD2, MMSET) a member of the same family, targets H3K36 when provided with nucleosome substrates but also can methylate histone H4 lysine-45 when octameric native or recombinant nucleosome substrates are provided (Li et al. 2009); dimethylation of histone H3 at lysine-37 (H3K36me2) is thought to be the principal chromatin-regulatory activity of WHSC1 (Kuo et al. 2011). Relatives NSD1 (KMT3B) and WHSC1L1 (KMT3F, NSD3) also methylate nucleosomal H3K36. NSD1 is active on unmethylated or a mimetic monomethylated H3K36, but not di- or trimethylated H3K36 mimetics (Li et al. 2009). Human SETD7 (KMT7, SET7/9), not classified within the 7 SET-domain containing families, mono-methylates lysine-5 of histone H3 (H3K4) (Xiao et al. 2003).
R-HSA-75896	Plasmalogen biosynthesis	1-Acylglycerol-3-phosphate is synthesized from dihydroxyacetone phosphate, an acyl CoA molecule and NADPH + H+ in four reactions catalyzed by peroxisomal enzymes, either in the matrix of the organelle or associated with its membrane. These reactions are annotated here for palmityl (C16:0) CoA. In a series of less well-characterized reactions in the cytosol and endoplasmic reticulum, these molecules are converted to ether lipids (plasmalogens). The functions of plasmalogens are not well understood. They are an abundant subclass of phospholipids, however, and defects in their metabolism are associated with serious human disease (de Vet et al. 1999; Nagan and Zoeller 2001).
R-HSA-76002	Platelet activation, signaling and aggregation	Platelet activation begins with the initial binding of adhesive ligands and of the excitatory platelet agonists (released or generated at the sites of vascular trauma) to cognate receptors on the platelet membrane (Ruggeri 2002). Intracellular signaling reactions then enhance the adhesive and procoagulant properties of tethered platelets or of platelets circulating in the proximity. Once platelets have adhered they degranulate, releasing stored secondary agents such as ADP, ATP, and synthesize thromboxane A2. These amplify the response, activating and recruiting further platelets to the area and promoting platelet aggregation. These amplify the response, activating and recruiting further platelets to the area and promoting platelet aggregation. Adenosine nucleotides signal through P2 purinergic receptors on the platelet membrane. ADP activates P2Y1 and P2Y12, which signal via both the alpha and gamma:beta components of the heterotrimeric G-protein (Hirsch et al. 2001, 2006), while ATP activates the ionotropic P2X1 receptor (Kunapuli et al. 2003). Activation of these receptors initiates a complex signaling cascade that ultimately results in platelet activation, aggregation and thrombus formation (Kahner et al. 2006). Integrin AlphaIIbBeta3 is the most abundant platelet receptor, with 40 000 to 80 000 copies per resting platelet, acting as a major receptor for fibrinogen and other adhesive molecules (Wagner et al. 1996). Activation of AlphaIIbBeta3 enhances adhesion and leads to platelet-platelet interactions, and thus aggregation (Philips et al. 1991). GP VI is the most potent collagen receptor initiating signal generation, an ability derived from its interaction with the FcRI gamma chain. This results in the phosphorylation of the gamma-chain by non-receptor tyrosine kinases of the Src family (1). The phosphotyrosine motif is recognized by the SH2 domains of Syk, a tyrosine kinase. This association activates the Syk enzyme, leading to activation (by tyrosine phosphorylation) of PLC gamma2 (2). Thrombin is an important platelet agonist generated on the membrane of stimulated platelets. Thrombin acts via cell surface Protease Activated Receptors (PARs). PARs are G-protein coupled receptors activated by a proteolytic cleavage in an extracellular loop (Vu, 1991) (3). Activated PARs signal via G alpha q (4) and via the beta:gamma component of the G-protein (5). Both stimulate PLC giving rise to PIP2 hydrolysis and consequent activation of PI3K (6). PLCgamma2 activation also gives rise to IP3 (7) which stimulates the IP3 receptor (8) leading to increased intracellular calcium. Platelet activation further results in the scramblase-mediated transport of negatively-charged phospholipids to the platelet surface. These phospholipids provide a catalytic surface (with the charge provided by phosphatidylserine and phosphatidylethanolamine) for the tenase complex (formed by the activated forms of the blood coagulation factors factor VIII and factor I).
R-HSA-75892	Platelet Adhesion to exposed collagen	Initiation of platelet adhesion is the first step in the formation of the platelet plug. Circulating platelets are arrested and subsequently activated by exposed collagen and vWF. It is not entirely clear which type of collagen is responsible for adhesion and activation; collagen types I and III are abundant in vascular epithelia but several other types incluing IV are present (Farndale 2006). Several collagen binding proteins are expressed on platelets, including integrin alpha2 beta1, GPVI, and GPIV. Integrin alpha2 beta1, known on leukocytes as VLA-2, is the major platelet collagen receptor (Kunicki et al. 1988). It requires Mg2+ to interact with collagen and may require initiation mediated by the activation of integrin alphaIIb beta3 (van de Walle 2007). Binding occurs via the alpha2 subunit I domain to a collagen motif with the sequence Gly-Phe-Hyp-Gly-Glu-Arg (Emsley 2000). Binding of collagen to alpha2 beta1 generates intracellular signals that contribute to platelet activation. These facilitate the engagement of the lower-affinity collagen receptor, GPVI (Keely 1996), the key receptor involved in collagen-induced platelet activation. The GPVI receptor is a complex of the GPVI protein with a dimer of Fc epsilon R1 gamma (FceRI gamma). The Src family kinases Fyn and Lyn constitutively associate with the GPVI:FceRIgamma complex in platelets and initiate platelet activation through phosphorylation of the immunoreceptor tyrosine-based activation motif (ITAM) in FceRI gamma, leading to binding and activation of the tyrosine kinase Syk. Downstream of Syk, a series of adapter molecules and effectors lead to platelet activation. vWF protein is a polymeric structure of variable size. It is secreted in two directions, by the endothelium basolaterally and into the bloodstream. Shear-induced aggregation is achieved when vWF binds via its A1 domain to GPIb (part of GPIb-IX-V), and via its A3 domain mediating collagen binding to the subendothelium. The interaction between vWF and GPIb is regulated by shear force; an increase in the shear stress results in a corresponding increase in the affinity of vWF for GPIb.
R-HSA-76009	Platelet Aggregation (Plug Formation)	The tethering of platelets to the site of vascular injury is the first step in the formation of a platelet thrombus. Firm adhesion of these tethered platelets, as well as the additional recruitment of others onto their surface leads to the formation of large platelet aggregates. The formation of a thrombus is strictly dependent on the formation of interplatelet bonds.
R-HSA-418360	Platelet calcium homeostasis	Ca2+ homeostasis is controlled by processes that elevate or counter the elevation of cytosolic Ca2+. During steady state conditions, cytoplasmic Ca2+ is reduced by the accumulation of Ca2+ in intracellular stores and by Ca2+ extrusion. The primary intracellular calcium store in platelets is the dense tubular system, the equivalent of the ER system in other cell types. Ca2+ is extruded by Ca2+-ATPases including plasma membrane Ca2+ ATPases (PMCAs) and sarco/endoplasmic reticulum Ca2+ -ATPase isoforms (SERCAs). <br><br>Activation of non- excitable cells involves the agonist-induced elevation of cytosolic Ca2+, an essential process for platelet activation. It occurs through Ca2+ release from intracellular stores and Ca2+ entry through the plasma membrane. Ca2+ store release involves phospholipase C (PLC)-mediated production of inositol-1,4,5-trisphosphate (IP3), which in turn stimulates IP3 receptor channels to release Ca2+ from intracellular stores. This is followed by Ca2+ entry into the cell through plasma membrane calcium channels, a process referred to as store-operated calcium entry (SOCE). Stromal interaction molecule 1 (STIM1), a Ca2+ sensor molecule in intracellular stores, and the four transmembrane channel protein Orai1 are the key players in platelet SOCE. Other major Ca2+ entry mechanisms are mediated by the direct receptor-operated calcium (ROC) channel, P2X1 and transient receptor potential channels (TRPCs).
R-HSA-114608	Platelet degranulation 	Platelets function as exocytotic cells, secreting a plethora of effector molecules at sites of vascular injury. Platelets contain a number of distinguishable storage granules including alpha granules, dense granules and lysosomes. On activation platelets release a variety of proteins, largely from storage granules but also as the result of apparent cell lysis. These act in an autocrine or paracrine fashion to modulate cell signaling. <br><br><br> Alpha granules contain mainly polypeptides such as fibrinogen, von Willebrand factor, growth factors and protease inhibitors that that supplement thrombin generation at the site of injury. Dense granules contain small molecules, particularly adenosine diphosphate (ADP), adenosine triphosphate (ATP), serotonin and calcium, all recruit platelets to the site of injury.
R-HSA-418346	Platelet homeostasis	Under normal conditions the vascular endothelium supports vasodilation, inhibits platelet adhesion and activation, suppresses coagulation, enhances fibrin cleavage and is anti-inflammatory in character. Under acute vascular trauma, vasoconstrictor mechanisms predominate and the endothelium becomes prothrombotic, procoagulatory and proinflammatory in nature. This is achieved by a reduction of endothelial dilating agents: adenosine, NO and prostacyclin; and by the direct action of ADP, serotonin and thromboxane on vascular smooth muscle cells to elicit their contraction (Becker et al. 2000). Cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) and endothelial nitric oxide synthase (eNOS) are primarily expressed in endothelial cells. Both are important regulators of vascular function. Under normal conditions, laminar flow induces vascular endothelial COX-2 expression and synthesis of Prostacyclin (PGI2) which in turn stimulates endothelial Nitric Oxide Synthase (eNOS) activity. PGI2 and NO both oppose platelet activation and aggregation, as does the CD39 ecto-ADPase, which decreases platelet activation and recruitment by metabolizing platelet-released ADP. 
R-HSA-432142	Platelet sensitization by LDL	Physiological concentrations (1g/L) of Low density lipoprotein (LDL) enhance platelet aggregation responses initiated by thrombin, collagen, and ADP. This enhancement involves the rapid phosphorylation of p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase (p38MAPK) at Thr180 and Tyr182. The receptor for LDL is ApoER2, a splice variant of the classical ApoE receptor. ApoER2 stimulation leads to association of the Src family kinase Fgr which is probably responsible for subsequent phosphorylation of p38MAPK. This stimulation is transient because LDL also increases the activity of PECAM-1, which stimulates phosphatases that dephosphorylate p38MAPK.
R-HSA-112043	PLC beta mediated events	The phospholipase C (PLC) family of enzymes is both diverse and complex. The isoforms beta, gamma and delta (each have subtypes) make up the members of this family. PLC hydrolyzes phosphatidylinositol bisphosphate (PIP2) into two second messengers, inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate (IP3) and diacylglycerol (DAG). IP3 mobilizes intracellular calcium stores while DAG activates protein kinase C isoforms which are involved in regulatory functions.
R-HSA-167021	PLC-gamma1 signalling	The activation of phosphlipase C-gamma (PLC-gamma) and subsequent mobilization of calcium from intracellular stores are essential for neurotrophin secretion. PLC-gamma is activated through the phosphorylation by TrkA receptor kinase and this form hydrolyses PIP2 to generate inositol tris-phosphate (IP3) and diacylglycerol (DAG). IP3 promotes the release of Ca2+ from internal stores and this results in activation of enzymes such as protein kinase C and Ca2+ calmodulin-regulated protein kinases.
R-HSA-1251932	PLCG1 events in ERBB2 signaling	Activation of PLCG1 signaling is observed only in the presence of ERBB2:EGFR heterodimers, with PLCG1 binding to phosphorylated tyrosine Y992 and Y1173 in the C-tail of EGFR (Chattopadhyay et al. 1999), and potentially Y1023 in the C-tail of ERBB2 (Fazioli et al. 1991, Cohen et al. 1996).
R-HSA-164525	Plus-strand DNA synthesis	Two specific polypurine tracts (PPT sequences) in the viral RNA, one within the pol gene (central or cPPT) and one immediately preceding the U3 sequence (3' PPT), are spared from degradation during minus strand DNA synthesis and prime plus-strand synthesis. At least two discrete steps of DNA replication, removal of the PPT RNAs and the tRNA primer that initiated minus-strand synthesis, and a strand transfer lead to the synthesis of a linear duplex DNA corresponding to the full length of the HIV genomic RNA with long terminal repeat (LTR) sequences at both ends. Both DNA synthesis and RNA degradation are catalyzed by domains of the HIV-1 reverse transcriptase (RT) heterodimer. During plus-strand synthesis, Preston and colleagues observed secondary sites of plus-strand initiation at low frequency both in the cell-free system and in cultured virus-infected cells (Klarman et al., 1997).
R-HSA-110362	POLB-Dependent Long Patch Base Excision Repair	During POLB-dependent long patch base excision repair (BER), PARP1 and/or PARP2 is recruited to the BER site along with flap endonuclease FEN1. PARP1 and/or PARP2 and FEN1 facilitate POLB-mediated strand displacement synthesis which involves incorporation of 2-10 nucleotides at the 3' end of the APEX1-created single strand break (SSB). After the DNA strand displacement synthesis is completed and the displaced strand is cleaved, POLB recruits DNA ligase I (LIG1) to ligate the SSB (Klungland and Lindahl 1997, Dimitriadis et al. 1998, Prasad et al. 2001, Lavrik et al. 2001, Tomkinson et al. 2001, Ranalli et al. 2002, Cistulli et al. 2004, Liu et al. 2005). 
R-HSA-156711	Polo-like kinase mediated events	At mitotic entry, Plk1 phosphorylates and activates Cdc25C phosphatase, whereas it phosphorylates and down-regulates Wee1A (Watanabe et al. 2004). Plk1 also phosphorylates and inhibits Myt1 activity (Sagata 2005). Cyclin B1-bound Cdc2, which is the target of Cdc25C, Wee1A, and Myt1, functions in a feedback loop and phosphorylates the latter components (Cdc25C, Wee1A, Myt1). The Cdc2- dependent phosphorylation provides docking sites for the polo-box domain of Plk1, thus promoting the Plk1-dependent regulation of these components and, as a result, activation of Cdc2-Cyclin B1.<p>PLK1 phosphorylates and activates the transcription factor FOXM1 which stimulates the expression of a number of genes needed for G2/M transition, including PLK1, thereby creating a positive feedback loop (Laoukili et al. 2005, Fu et al. 2008, Sadasivam et al. 2012, Chen et al. 2013). 
R-HSA-69091	Polymerase switching	After the primers are synthesized, Replication Factor C binds to the 3'-end of the initiator DNA to trigger polymerase switching. The non-processive nature of pol alpha catalytic activity and the tight binding of Replication Factor C to the primer-template junction presumably lead to the turnover of the pol alpha:primase complex. After the Pol alpha-primase primase complex is displaced from the primer, the proliferating cell nuclear antigen (PCNA) binds to form a "sliding clamp" structure. Replication Factor C then dissociates, and DNA polymerase delta binds and catalyzes the processive synthesis of DNA.
R-HSA-174411	Polymerase switching on the C-strand of the telomere	After the primers are synthesized on the G-Rich strand, Replication Factor C binds to the 3'-end of the initiator DNA to trigger polymerase switching. The non-processive nature of pol alpha catalytic activity and the tight binding of Replication Factor C to the primer-template junction presumably lead to the turnover of the pol alpha:primase complex. After the Pol alpha-primase primase complex is displaced from the primer, the proliferating cell nuclear antigen (PCNA) binds to form a "sliding clamp" structure. Replication Factor C then dissociates, and DNA polymerase delta binds and catalyzes the processive synthesis of DNA.
R-HSA-438064	Post NMDA receptor activation events	Ca2+ influx through the NMDA receptor initiates subsequent molecular pathways that have a defined role in establishing long-lasting synaptic changes. The molecular signaling initiated by a rise in Ca2+ within the spine leads to phosphorylation of Cyclic AMP Response Element binding protein (CREB) at serine 133 which is involved in the transcription of genes that results in long lasting changes in the synapse. The phosphorylation of CREB by increased Ca2+ can be brought about by distinct molecular pathways that may involve MAP kinase, activation of adenylate cyclase, activation of CaMKII and/or the activation of CaMKIV.
R-HSA-389977	Post-chaperonin tubulin folding pathway	Alpha and beta tubulin folding intermediates are formed through ATP-dependent interaction with TriC/CCT. In order to form a functional heterodimer, these folding intermediates undergo a series of interactions with five proteins: (cofactors A-E) following release from TriC/CCT (reviewed in Cowan and Lewis et al., 2001). These interactions are described in the reactions below. Ultimately, alpha tubulin, when associated with cofactor E, interacts with cofactor D-bound beta-tubulin. The entry of cofactor C into this complex results in the discharge of native heterodimer triggered by GTP hydrolysis in beta tubulin (Tian et al., 1997).
R-HSA-76044	Post-Elongation Processing of the Transcript	Post-transcriptional splicing of introns is affected neither by the elongating properties of RNA polymerase II, nor by the binding of splicing regulatory factors to the enzyme. It is only affected by the relative abundance of constitutive and/or regulatory splicing factors at the sites where splicing takes place. Nevertheless it is important to point out that cytological evidence indicates that unspliced or partially spliced pre-mRNAs do not diffuse in the nucleoplasm far from the transcription sites. Therefore, recruitment of splicing factors to transcription sites would still favor the post-transcriptional splicing of introns.
R-HSA-426496	Post-transcriptional silencing by small RNAs	Small RNAs act with components of the RNA-induced silencing complex (RISC) to post-transcriptionally repress expression of mRNAs (reviewed in Nowotny and Yang 2009, Chua et al. 2009). Two mechanisms exist: 1) cleavage of target RNAs by complexes containing Argonaute2 (AGO2, EIF2C2) and a guide RNA that exactly matches the target mRNA and 2) inhibition of translation of target RNAs by complexes containing AGO2 and an inexactly matching guide RNA or by complexes containing a nonendonucleolytic Argonaute (AGO1 (EIF2C1), AGO3 (EIF2C3), or AGO4 (EIF2C4)) and a guide RNA of exact or inexact match. Small interfering RNAs (siRNAs) and microRNAs (miRNAs) can serve as guide RNAs in both types of mechanism. <br>RNAi also appears to direct chromatin modifications that cause transcriptional gene silencing (reviewed in Verdel et al. 2009).
R-HSA-163125	Post-translational modification: synthesis of GPI-anchored proteins	Glycosylphosphatidyl inositol (GPI) acts as a membrane anchor for many cell surface proteins. GPI is synthesized in the endoplasmic reticulum. In humans, a single pathway consisting of eleven reactions appears to be responsible for the synthesis of the major GPI species involved in membrane protein anchoring.<p>As a nascent protein fated to become GPI-anchored moves into the lumen of the endoplasmic reticulum, it is attacked by a transamidase complex that cleaves it near its carboxy terminus and attaches an acylated GPI moiety. The GPI moiety is deacylated, yielding a protein-GPI conjugate that can be efficiently transported to the Golgi apparatus.
R-HSA-597592	Post-translational protein modification	After translation, many newly formed proteins undergo further covalent modifications that alter their functional properties and that are essentially irreversible under physiological conditions in the body. These modifications include the internal peptide bond cleavages that activate proenzymes, the attachment of oligosaccharide moieties to membrane-bound and secreted proteins, the attachment of lipid or glycolipid moieties that serve to anchor proteins to cellular membranes, and the vitamin K-dependent attachment of carboxyl groups to glutamate residues.
R-HSA-622327	Postsynaptic nicotinic acetylcholine receptors	Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors are found in the postsynaptic terminals and these receptors are responsible in mediating postsynaptic currents. Most common types of postsynaptic nicotinic acetylcholine receptors are homomeric alpha 7 containing acetylcholine receptors. The densities of acetylcholine receptors are found to be similar to NMDA and AMPA receptors at these sites. Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors may permit both sodium and calcium ions, however, the ratio of sodium and calcium influx makes the receptors either highly sodium permeable or highly calcium permeable.
R-HSA-1296071	Potassium Channels	Potassium channels are tetrameric ion channels that are widely distributed and are found in all cell types. Potassium channels control resting membrane potential in neurons, contribute to regulation of action potentials in cardiac muscle and help release of insulin form pancreatic beta cells.<br>Broadly K+ channels are classified into voltage gated K+ channels, Hyperpolarization activated cyclic nucleotide gated K+ channels (HCN), Tandem pore domain K+ channels, Ca2+ activated K+ channels and inwardly rectifying K+ channels.
R-HSA-1296067	Potassium transport channels	Inwardly rectifying potassium transport are tetrameric channels that are found in kidney in the nephron. Kir 1.1 works as a homotetramer, however, Kir 4.1 and 5.1 work as heterotetramers. These channels transport K+ from cytosol to the lumen of the tubules.
R-HSA-2892247	POU5F1 (OCT4), SOX2, NANOG activate genes related to proliferation	POU5F1 (OCT4), SOX2, and NANOG bind elements in the promoters of target genes. The target genes of each transcription factor overlap extensively: POU5F1, SOX2, and NANOG co-occupy at least 353 genes (Boyer et al. 2005). About half of POU5F1 targets also bind SOX2 and about 90% of these also bind NANOG (Boyer et al. 2005). Upon binding the transcription factors activate expression of one subset of target genes and repress another subset (Kim et al. 2006, Matoba et al. 2006, Player et al. 2006, Babaie et al. 2007). The targets listed in this module are those that have been described as composing activated genes in the core transcriptional network of pluripotent stem cells (Assou et al. 2007, Chavez et al. 2009, Jung et al. 2010). Inferences from mouse to human have been made with caution because of significant differences between the two species (Ginis et al. 2004).
R-HSA-2892245	POU5F1 (OCT4), SOX2, NANOG repress genes related to differentiation	POU5F1 (OCT4), SOX2, and NANOG bind elements in the promoters of target genes. The target genes of each transcription factor overlap extensively: POU5F1, SOX2, and NANOG co-occupy at least 353 genes (Boyer et al. 2005). About half of POU5F1 targets also bind SOX2 and about 90% of these also bind NANOG (Boyer et al. 2005). Upon binding the transcription factors activate expression of one subset of target genes in the core transcriptional network of pluripotent stem cells and repress another subset (Kim et al. 2006, Matoba et al. 2006, Player et al. 2006, Assou et al. 2007, Babaie et al. 2007, Chavez et al. 2009, Jung et al. 2010). The target genes listed in this module are the repressed genes. Caution must be used when making inferences about human stem cells from mouse stem cells because of significant differences between the two species (Ginis et al. 2004).
R-HSA-163767	PP2A-mediated dephosphorylation of key metabolic factors	A member of the PP2A family of phosphatases dephosphorylates both cytosolic and nuclear forms of ChREBP (Carbohydrate Response Elemant Binding Protein). In the nucleus, dephosphorylated ChREBP complexes with MLX protein and binds to ChRE sequence elements in chromosomal DNA, activating transcription of genes involved in glycolysis and lipogenesis. The phosphatase is activated by Xylulose-5-phosphate, an intermediate of the pentose phosphate pathway (Kabashima et al. 2003). The rat enzyme has been purified to homogeneity and shown by partial amino acid sequence analysis to differ from previously described PP2A phosphatases (Nishimura and Uyeda 1995) - the human enzyme has not been characterized.
R-HSA-1989781	PPARA activates gene expression	The set of genes regulated by PPAR-alpha is not fully known in humans, however many examples have been found in mice. Genes directly activated by PPAR-alpha contain peroxisome proliferator receptor elements (PPREs) in their promoters and include: <br>1) genes involved in fatty acid oxidation and ketogenesis (Acox1, Cyp4a, Acadm, Hmgcs2);<br>2) genes involved in fatty acid transport (Cd36, , Slc27a1, Fabp1, Cpt1a, Cpt2);<br>3) genes involved in producing fatty acids and very low density lipoproteins (Me1, Scd1);<br>4) genes encoding apolipoproteins (Apoa1, Apoa2, Apoa5);<br>5) genes involved in triglyceride clearance ( Angptl4);<br>6) genes involved in glycerol metabolism (Gpd1 in mouse);<br>7) genes involved in glucose metabolism (Pdk4);<br>8) genes involved in peroxisome proliferation (Pex11a);<br>9) genes involved in lipid storage (Plin, Adfp).<br>Many other genes are known to be regulated by PPAR-alpha but whether their regulation is direct or indirect remains to be found. These genes include: ACACA, FAS, SREBP1, FADS1, DGAT1, ABCA1, PLTP, ABCB4, UGT2B4, SULT2A1, Pnpla2, Acsl1, Slc27a4, many Acot genes, and others (reviewed in Rakhshandehroo et al. 2010). 
R-HSA-212300	PRC2 methylates histones and DNA	Polycomb group proteins are responsible for the heritable repression of genes during development (Lee et al. 2006, Ku et al. 2008, reviewed in Simon and Kingston 2009, Margueron and Reinberg 2011, Di Croce and Helin 2013). Two major families of Polycomb complexes exist: Polycomb Repressive Complex 1 (PRC1) and Polycomb Repressive Complex 2 (PRC2). PRC1 and PRC2 each appear to comprise sets of distinct complexes that contain common core subunits and distinct accessory subunits (reviewed in Nayak et al. 2011). PRC2, through its component EZH2 or, in some complexes, EZH1 produces the initial molecular mark of repression, the trimethylation of lysine-27 of histone H3 (H3K27me3). How PRC2 is initially recruited to a locus remains unknown, however cytosine-guanine (CpG) motifs and transcripts have been suggested. Different mechanisms may be used at different loci. The trimethylated H3K27 produced by PRC2 is bound by the Polycomb subunit of PRC1. PRC1 ubiquitinates histone H2A and maintains repression.
R-HSA-1912422	Pre-NOTCH Expression and Processing	In humans and other mammals the NOTCH gene family has four members, NOTCH1, NOTCH2, NOTCH3 and NOTCH4, encoded on four different chromosomes. Their transcription is developmentally regulated and tissue specific, but very little information exists on molecular mechanisms of transcriptional regulation. Translation of NOTCH mRNAs is negatively regulated by a number of recently discovered microRNAs (Li et al. 2009, Pang et al.2010, Ji et al. 2009, Kong et al. 2010, Marcet et al. 2011, Ghisi et al. 2011, Song et al. 2009, Hashimoto et al. 2010, Costa et al. 2009). <br><br> The nascent forms of NOTCH precursors, Pre-NOTCH1, Pre-NOTCH2, Pre-NOTCH3 and Pre-NOTCH4, undergo extensive posttranslational modifications in the endoplasmic reticulum and Golgi apparatus to become functional. In the endoplasmic reticulum, conserved serine and threonine residues in the EGF repeats of NOTCH extracellular domain are fucosylated and glucosylated by POFUT1 and POGLUT1, respectively (Yao et al. 2011, Stahl et al. 2008, Wang et al. 2001, Shao et al. 2003, Acar et al. 2008, Fernandez Valdivia et al. 2011). <br><br> In the Golgi apparatus, fucose groups attached to NOTCH EGF repeats can be elongated by additional glycosylation steps initiated by fringe enzymes (Bruckner et al. 2000, Moloney et al. 2000, Cohen et al. 1997, Johnston et al. 1997, Chen et al. 2001). Fringe-mediated modification modulates NOTCH signaling but is not an obligatory step in Pre-NOTCH processing. Typically, processing of Pre-NOTCH in the Golgi involves cleavage by FURIN convertase (Blaumueller et al. 1997, Logeat et al. 1998, Gordon et al. 2009, Rand et al. 2000, Chan et al. 1998). The cleavage of NOTCH results in formation of mature NOTCH heterodimers that consist of NOTCH extracellular domain (NEC i.e. NECD) and NOTCH transmembrane and intracellular domain (NTM i.e. NTMICD). NOTCH heterodimers translocate to the cell surface where they function in cell to cell signaling.
R-HSA-1912420	Pre-NOTCH Processing in Golgi	NOTCH undergoes final posttranslational processing in the Golgi apparatus (Lardelli et al. 1994, Blaumueller et al. 1997, Weinmaster et al. 1991, Weinmaster et al. 1992, Uyttendaele et al. 1996). Movement of NOTCH precursors from the endoplasmic reticulum to Golgi is controlled by SEL1L protein, a homolog of C. elegans sel-1. SEL1L localizes to the endoplasmic reticulum membrane and prevents translocation of misfolded proteins, therefore serving as a quality control check (Li et al. 2010, Sundaram et al. 1993, Francisco et al. 2010). Similarly, C. elegans sel-9 and its mammalian homolog TMED2 are Golgi membrane proteins that participate in quality control of proteins transported from Golgi to the plasma membrane. Translocation of a mutant C. elegans NOTCH homolog lin-12 from the Golgi to the plasma membrane is negatively regulated by sel-9 (Wen et al. 1999). A GTPase RAB6 positively controls NOTCH trafficking through Golgi (Purcell et al. 1999). <br><br> <br>Processing of mammalian NOTCH precursors in the Golgi typically involves the cleavage by FURIN convertase. Pre-NOTCH is a ~300 kDa protein, and cleavage by FURIN produces two fragments with approximate sizes of 110 kDa and 180 kDa. The 110 kDa fragment contains the transmembrane and intracellular domains of NOTCH and is known as NTM or NTMICD. The 189 kDa fragment contains NOTCH extracellular sequence and is known as NEC or NECD. The NTM and NEC fragments heterodimerize (Blaumueller et al. 1997, Logeat et al. 1998, Chan et al. 1998) and are held together by disulfide bonds and calcium ions (Rand et al. 2000, Gordon et al. 2009). <br> <br> <br>An optional step in Pre-NOTCH processing in the Golgi is modification by fringe enzymes. Fringe enzymes are glycosyl transferases that initiate elongation of O-linked fucose on fucosylated peptides by addition of a beta 1,3 N-acetylglucosaminyl group, resulting in formation of disaccharide chains on NOTCH EGF repeats (GlcNAc-bet1,3-fucitol). Three fringe enzymes are known in mammals: LFNG (lunatic fringe), MFNG (manic fringe) and RFNG (radical fringe). LFNG shows the highest catalytic activity in modifying NOTCH (Bruckner et al. 2000, Moloney et al. 2000). Fringe-created disaccharide chains on NOTCH EGF repeats are further extended by B4GALT1 (beta-1,4-galactosyltransferase 1), which adds galactose to the N-acetylglucosaminyl group, resulting in formation of trisaccharide Gal-beta1,4-GlcNAc-beta1,3-fucitol chains (Moloney et al. 2000, Chen et al. 2001). Formation of trisaccharide chains is the minimum requirement for fringe-mediated modulation of NOTCH signaling, although fringe-modified NOTCH expressed on the cell surface predominantly contains tetrasaccharide chains on EGF repeats. The tetrasaccharide chains are formed by sialyltransferase(s) that add sialic acid to galactose, resulting in formation of Sia-alpha2,3-Gal-beta1,4-GlcNAc-beta1,3-fucitol (Moloney et al. 2000). Three known Golgi membrane sialyltransferases could be performing this function: ST3GAL3, ST3GAL4 and ST3GAL6 (Harduin-Lepers et al. 2001). The modification of NOTCH by fringe enzymes modulates NOTCH-signaling by increasing the affinity of NOTCH receptors for delta-like ligands, DLL1 and DLL4, while decreasing affinity for jagged ligands, JAG1 and JAG2. 
R-HSA-1912399	Pre-NOTCH Processing in the Endoplasmic Reticulum	In the endoplasmic reticulum, glycosyl transferases modify NOTCH precursors by glycosylating conserved serine and threonine residues in EGF repeats of NOTCH. <br><br> O-fucosyl transferase POFUT1 fucosylates NOTCH serine and threonine residues that conform to the consensus sequence C2-X(4-5)-S/T-C3, where C2 and C3 are the second and third cysteine residue within the EGF repeat, and X(4-5) is four to five amino acid residues of any type (Yao et al. 2011, Stahl et al. 2008, Wang et al. 2001, Shao et al. 2003). <br> <br>O-glucosyl transferase POGLUT1, mammalian homolog of the Drosophila enzyme Rumi, adds a glucosyl group to conserved serine residues within the EGF repeats of NOTCH. The consensus sequence for POGLUT1-mediated glucosylation is C1-X-S-X-P-C2, where C1 and C2 are the first and second cysteine residue in the EGF repeat, respectively, while X represents any amino acid (Acar et al. 2008, Fernandez-Valdivia et al. 2011). Both fucosylation and glucosylation of NOTCH receptor precursors are essential for functionality.
R-HSA-1912408	Pre-NOTCH Transcription and Translation	In humans, the NOTCH protein family has four members: NOTCH1, NOTCH2, NOTCH3 and NOTCH4. NOTCH1 protein was identified first, as the product of a chromosome 9 gene translocated in T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia that was homologous to Drosophila Notch (Ellisen et al. 1991). At the same time, rat Notch1 was cloned (Weinmaster et al. 1991), followed by cloning of mouse Notch1, named Motch (Del Amo et al. 1992). NOTCH2 protein is the product of a gene on chromosome 1 (Larsson et al. 1994). NOTCH2 expression is differentially regulated during B-cell development (Bertrand et al. 2000). NOTCH2 mutations are a rare cause of Alagille syndrome (McDaniell et al. 2006). NOTCH3 is the product of a gene on chromosome 19. NOTCH3 mutations are the underlying cause of CADASIL, cerebral arteriopathy with subcortical infarcts and leukoencephalopathy (Joutel et al. 1996). NOTCH4, the last NOTCH protein discovered, is the product of a gene on chromosome 6 (Li et al. 1998). <br><br> MicroRNAs play an important negative role in translation and/or stability of NOTCH mRNAs. MicroRNAs miR-34 (miR-34A, miR-34B and mi-R34C), whose transcription is directly induced by the tumor suppressor protein p53 (Chang et al. 2007, Raver-Shapira et al. 2007, He et al. 2007, Corney et al. 2007) bind and negatively regulate translation of NOTCH1 mRNA (Li et al. 2009, Pang et al. 2010, Ji et al. 2009) and NOTCH2 mRNA (Li et al. 2009). NOTCH1 mRNA translation is also negatively regulated by microRNAs miR-200B and miR-200C (Kong et al. 2010), as well as miR-449A, miR-449B and miR-449C (Marcet et al. 2011). Translation of NOTCH3 mRNA is negatively regulated by microRNAs miR-150 (Ghisi et al. 2011) and miR-206 (Song et al. 2009). Translation of NOTCH4 mRNA is negatively regulated by microRNAs miR-181C (Hashimoto et al. 2010) and miR-302A (Costa et al. 2009). <br><br> Nascent NOTCH peptides are co-translationally targeted to the endoplasmic reticulum for further processing, followed by modification in the Golgi apparatus, before trafficking to the plasma membrane. Endoplasmic reticulum calcium ATPases, positively regulate NOTCH trafficking, possibly by contributing to accurate folding of NOTCH precursors (Periz et al. 1999).
R-HSA-389957	Prefoldin mediated transfer of substrate  to CCT/TriC	Unfolded actins and tubulins bound to prefoldin are transferred to CCT via a docking mechanism (McCormack and Willison, 2001).
R-HSA-196108	Pregnenolone biosynthesis	The first process in the synthesis of all steroid hormones is the synthesis of pregnenolone from cholesterol. In this process, cholesterol mobilized from cytosolic lipid droplets or from lysosomes is transported to mitochondria and becomes localized to the inner mitochondrial membrane. Cholesterol transport appears to be rate-limiting for steroid hormone synthesis and its regulation, at the step of StAR-mediated traversal of the mitochondrial membrane, plays a central role in determining the amounts and identities of steroid hormones made in the body. In the inner mitochondrial membrane, cholesterol is converted to pregnenolone in a sequence of three reactions, all catalyzed by CYP11A (side chain cleavage enzyme). Finally, pregnenolone re-enters the cytosol (Payne and Hales 2004; Stocco 2001).
R-HSA-500657	Presynaptic function of Kainate receptors	Kainate receptors in the presynaptic neuron are involved in modulating the release of neurotransmitters like glutamate and gamma amino butyric acid (GABA). This activity of Kainate receptors is independent of ionic fluxes through the channel. Homomeric kainate receptors containing GRIK3 are shown to be involved in this process. Kainate receptors in these neurons bind G-protein coupled receptors that activate phospholipase C which eventually triggers the release of Ca2+ from the intracellular stores. The released Ca2+ further initiates the fusion and release of vesicles containing the neurotransmitter.
R-HSA-622323	Presynaptic nicotinic acetylcholine receptors	Presynaptic terminal acetylcholine receptors are located at or near nerve terminal and modulate the release of neurotransmitter such as glutamate, noradrenaline and dopamine. Activation of presynaptic acetylcholine receptors leads to influx of Ca2+ and sufficient increase in local Ca2+ concentrations which could be due to either direct or indirect Ca2+ entry. Direct Ca2+ entry through acetylcholine receptors containing alpha3 beta4 receptors is sufficient for the release of noradrenaline in hippocampus. Indirect Ca2+ increase could be due to Na+ dependent depolarization and activation of voltage dependent calcium channels (VDCC) as in the case of dopamine release. Local Ca2+ increase could also be due to an initial Ca2+ influx through acetlycholine homomeric receptors containing alpha7 subunits and further increase in Ca2+ is elicited due to Ca2+ induced Ca2+ release (CICR) that involves the ryanodine receptors in the ER and the IP3 receptors. This mechanism is used in hippocampal mossyfibre pathway. Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors may permit both sodium and calcium ions, however, the ratio of sodium and calcium influx makes these receptors either highly sodium permeable or highly calcium permeable. 
R-HSA-5693616	Presynaptic phase of homologous DNA pairing and strand exchange	The presynaptic phase of homologous DNA pairing and strand exchange during homologous recombination repair (HRR) begins with the displacement of RPA from ssDNA (Thompson and Limoli 2003) by the joint action of RAD51 and BRCA2. CHEK1-mediated phosphorylation of RAD51 and BRCA2 (Sorensen et al. 2005, Bahassi et al. 2008) is needed for BRCA2-mediated nucleation of RAD51 on 3'-ssDNA overhangs, RPA displacement and formation of RAD51 nucleofilaments (Yang et al. 2005, Jensen et al. 2010, Liu et al. 2010, Thorslund et al. 2010). Invasive RAD51 nucleofilaments are stabilized by the BCDX2 complex composed of RAD51B, RAD51C, RAD51D and XRCC2 (Masson et al. 2001, Chun et al. 2013, Amunugama et al. 2013).
R-HSA-3215018	Processing and activation of SUMO	The initial translation products of SUMO1, SUMO2, and SUMO3 are precursors that have extra amino acid residues at the C-terminus (reviewed in Wang and Dasso 2009, Wilkinson and Henley 2010, Hannoun et al. 2010, Gareau and Lima 2010, Hay 2007). SUMO1 has 4 extra residues, SUMO2 has 2 extra residues, and SUMO3 has 11 extra residues. Proteolytic cleavage by SUMO peptidases (SENPs) removes the propeptide and leaves diglycine residues at the C-terminus. Each SENP has distinct preferences for certain SUMOs. SENP1 has highest activity on SUMO1; SENP2 and SENP5 have highest activity on SUMO2 (Shen et al. 2006, Reverter and Lima 2006, Mikolajczyk et al. 2007). SENP1 and SENP2 are predominantly nucleoplasmic (Bailey and O'Hare 2004, Kim et al. 2005, Zhang et al. 2002, Hang and Dasso 2002, Itahana et al. 2006) and SENP5 is predominantly nucleolar (Di Bacco et al. 2006, Gong and Yeh 2006), therefore the processing reactions are believed to occur in the nucleus. The processed SUMO is then activated by formation of a thioester bond with a cysteine residue of an E1 enzyme, UBA2 (SAE2) in a complex with SAE1. SUMO is then transferred from the E1 enzyme to an E2 enzyme, UBC9 (UBE2I).
R-HSA-72203	Processing of Capped Intron-Containing Pre-mRNA	Co-transcriptional pre-mRNA splicing is not obligatory. Pre-mRNA splicing begins co-transcriptionally and often continues post-transcriptionally. Human genes contain an average of nine introns per gene, which cannot serve as splicing substrates until both 5' and 3' ends of each intron are synthesized. Thus the time that it takes for pol II to synthesize each intron defines a minimal time and distance along the gene in which splicing factors can be recruited. The time that it takes for pol II to reach the end of the gene defines the maximal time in which splicing could occur co-transcriptionally. Thus, the kinetics of transcription can affect the kinetics of splicing.Any covalent change in a primary (nascent) mRNA transcript is mRNA Processing. For successful gene expression, the primary mRNA transcript needs to be converted to a mature mRNA prior to its translation into polypeptide. Eucaryotic mRNAs undergo a series of complex processing reactions; these begin on nascent transcripts as soon as a few ribonucleotides have been synthesized during transcription by RNA Polymerase II, through the export of the mature mRNA to the cytoplasm, and culminate with mRNA turnover in the cytoplasm.
R-HSA-75067	Processing of Capped Intronless Pre-mRNA	Co-transcriptional pre-mRNA splicing is not obligatory. Pre-mRNA splicing begins co-transcriptionally and often continues post-transcriptionally. Human genes contain an average of nine introns per gene, which cannot serve as splicing substrates until both 5' and 3' ends of each intron are synthesized. Thus the time that it takes for pol II to synthesize each intron defines a minimal time and distance along the gene in which splicing factors can be recruited. The time that it takes for pol II to reach the end of the gene defines the maximal time in which splicing could occur co-transcriptionally. Thus, the kinetics of transcription can affect the kinetics of splicing.<br> There are two classes of intronless pre-mRNAs (mRNAs expressed from genes that lack introns). The first class encodes the replication dependent histone mRNAs. These mRNAs have unique 3' ends that do not have a polyA tail. The replication dependent histone mRNAs in all metazoans, as well as Chlamydomonas and Volvox fall into this class. <p>The second class of mRNAs end in polyA tails, which are formed by a mechanism similar to that which poly-adenylate pre-mRNAs containing introns. In the intronless genes there is a different method of replacing the 3' splice site that activates polyadenylation.
R-HSA-5693607	Processing of DNA double-strand break ends	Homology directed repair (HDR) through homologous recombination (HRR) or single strand annealing (SSA) requires extensive resection of DNA double strand break (DSB) ends (Thompson and Limoli 2003, Ciccia and Elledge 2010). The resection is performed in a two-step process, where the MRN complex (MRE11A:RAD50:NBN) and RBBP8 (CtIP) bound to BRCA1 initiate the resection. This step is regulated by the complex of CDK2 and CCNA (cyclin A), ensuring the initiation of HRR during S and G2 phases of the cell cycle, when sister chromatids are available. The initial resection is also regulated by ATM-mediated phosphorylation of RBBP8 and CHEK2-mediated phosphorylation of BRCA1 (Chen et al. 2008, Yun and Hiom 2009, Buis et al. 2012, Wang et al. 2013, Davies et al. 2015, Parameswaran et al. 2015). After the initial resection, DNA nucleases EXO1 and/or DNA2 perform long-range resection, which is facilitated by DNA helicases BLM or WRN, as well as BRIP1 (BACH1) (Chen et al. 2008, Nimonkar et al. 2011, Sturzenegger et al. 2014, Suhasini et al. 2011). The resulting long 3'-ssDNA overhangs are coated by the RPA heterotrimers (RPA1:RPA2:RPA3), which recruit ATR:ATRIP complexes to DNA DSBs and, in collaboration with RAD17:RFC and RAD9:HUS1:RAD1 complexes, and TOPBP1 and RHNO1, activate ATR signaling. Activated ATR phosphorylates RPA2 and activates CHEK1 (Cotta-Ramusino et al. 2011), both of which are necessary prerequisites for the subsequent steps in HRR and SSA.
R-HSA-77595	Processing of Intronless Pre-mRNAs	The 3' ends of eukaryotic mRNAs are generated by posttranscriptional processing of an extended primary transcript. For almost all RNAs, 3' processing consists of two steps: The mRNA is first cleaved at a particular phosphodiester bond downstream of the coding sequence. The upstream fragment then receives a poly(A) tail of approximately 250 adenylate residues whereas the downstream fragment is degraded. The two partial reactions are coupled so that reaction intermediates are usually undetectable. While 3' processing can be studied as an isolated event in vitro, it appears to be connected to transcription, splicing and transcription termination in vivo.
R-HSA-174414	Processive synthesis on the C-strand of the telomere	Once polymerase switching from pol alpha to pol delta is complete the processive synthesis of a short run of DNA called an Okazaki fragment begins. DNA synthesis is discontinuous and as the extending Okazaki fragment reaches the RNA primer, this primer is folded into a single-stranded flap, which is removed by endonucleases. The process of extension is completed by the ligation of adjacent Okazaki fragments.
R-HSA-69183	Processive synthesis on the lagging strand	The key event that allows the processive synthesis on the lagging strand, is polymerase switching from pol alpha to pol delta, as on the leading strand. However, the processive synthesis on the lagging strand proceeds very differently. DNA synthesis is discontinuous, and involves the formation of short fragments called the Okazaki fragments. During the synthesis of Okazaki fragments, the RNA primer is folded into a single-stranded flap, which is removed by endonucleases. This is followed by the ligation of adjacent Okazaki fragments.
R-HSA-5357801	Programmed Cell Death	Cell death is a fundamental cellular response that has a crucial role in shaping our bodies during development and in regulating tissue homeostasis by eliminating unwanted cells. There are a number of different forms of cell death, each with a corresponding number of complex subprocesses. The first form of regulated or programmed cell death to be characterized was apoptosis. Evidence has emerged for a number of regulated non-apoptotic cell death pathways, including some with morphological features that were previously attributed to necrosis. More recently necrosis has been subdivided into parts including programmed necrotic cell death processes, such as RIP1-mediated regulated necrosos or pyroptosis.<br>Reactome currently represents programmed cell death using the model of extrinsic signalling that leads to a molecular decision point pivoting on caspase-8 activation or inhibition. Caspase-8 activation tilts the cell towards apoptosis, while caspase-8 inhibition tilts the cell towards Regulated Necrosis.<p>The terminology and molecular definitions of cell death-related events annotated here are consistent with the 2015 recommendations of the Nomenclature Committee on Cell Death (NCCD) (Galluzzi L et al. 2015).
R-HSA-964827	Progressive trimming of alpha-1,2-linked mannose residues from Man9/8/7GlcNAc2 to produce Man5GlcNAc2	In the cis-Golgi, Man7, Man8 or Man9 N-glycans are progressively trimmed to Man5 N-glycans. The reaction can be catalyzed by one of three known mannosidases, expressed in different tissues and with slightly different affinity. These enzymes trim the mannoses in a different order (Tremblay and Herscovics, 2000), but produce the same output with 5 mannoses.<br>A small confusion on the nomenclature of these genes coding for these enzymes is present in the literature: the standard HGNC symbols are MAN1A1, MAN1A2, MAN1C1, but MAN1A2 is also referred to as MAN1B in certain publications, while MAN1B1 is the enzyme acting in the ERQC compartment on unfolded glycoproteins. Moreover, the names do not correspond to a preference of these enzymes for which of the three mannose branches these trim first.
R-HSA-1170546	Prolactin receptor signaling	Prolactin (PRL) is a hormone secreted mainly by the anterior pituitary gland. It was originally identified by its ability to stimulate the development of the mammary gland and lactation, but is now known to have numerous and varied functions (Bole-Feysot et al. 1998). Despite this, few pathologies have been associated with abnormalities in prolactin receptor (PRLR) signaling, though roles in various forms of cancer and certain autoimmune disorders have been suggested (Goffin et al. 2002). A vast body of literature suggests effects of PRL in immune cells (Matera 1996) but PRLR KO mice have unaltered immune system development and function (Bouchard et al. 1999). In addition to the pituitary, numerous other tissues produce PRL, including the decidua and myometrium, certain cells of the immune system, brain, skin and exocrine glands such as the mammary, sweat and lacrimal glands (Ben-Jonathan et al. 1996). Pituitary PRL secretion is negatively regulated by inhibitory factors originating from the hypothalamus, the most important of which is dopamine, acting through the D2 subclass of dopamine receptors present in lactotrophs (Freeman et al. 2000). PRL-binding sites or receptors have been identified in numerous cells and tissues of adult mammals. Various forms of PRLR, generated by alternative splicing, have been reported in several species including humans (Kelly et al. 1991, Clevenger et al. 2003).<br><br>PRLR is a member of the cytokine receptor superfamily. Like many other members of this family, the first step in receptor activation was generally believed to be ligand-induced dimerization whereby one molecule of PRL bound to two molecules of receptor (Elkins et al. 2000). Recent reports suggest that PRLR pre-assembles at the plasma membrane in the absence of ligand (Gadd & Clevenger 2006, Tallet et al. 2011), suggesting that ligand-induced activation involves conformational changes in preformed PRLR dimers (Broutin et al. 2010). <br><br>PRLR has no intrinsic kinase activity but associates (Lebrun et al. 1994, 1995) with Janus kinase 2 (JAK2) which is activated following receptor activation (Campbell et al. 1994, Rui et al. 1994, Carter-Su et al. 2000, Barua et al. 2009). JAK2-dependent activation of JAK1 has also been reported (Neilson et al. 2007). It is generally accepted that activation of JAK2 occurs by transphosphorylation upon ligand-induced receptor activation, based on JAK activation by chimeric receptors in which various extracellular domains of cytokine or tyrosine kinase receptors were fused to the IL-2 receptor beta chain (see Ihle et al. 1994). This activation step involves the tyrosine phosphorylation of JAK2, which in turn phosphorylates PRLR on specific intracellular tyrosine residues leading to STAT5 recruitment and signaling, considered to be the most important signaling cascade for PRLR. STAT1 and STAT3 activation have also been reported (DaSilva et al. 1996) as have many other signaling pathways; signaling through MAP kinases (Shc/SOS/Grb2/Ras/Raf/MAPK) has been reported as a consequence of PRL stimuilation in many different cellular systems (see Bole-Feysot et al. 1998) though it is not clear how this signal is propagated. Other cascades non exhaustively include Src kinases, Focal adhesion kinase, phospholipase C gamma, PI3 kinase/Akt and Nek3 (Clevenger et al. 2003, Miller et al. 2007). The protein tyrosine phosphatase SHP2 is recruited to the C terminal tyrosine of PRLR and may have a regulatory role (Ali & Ali 2000). PRLR phosphotyrosines can recruit insulin receptor substrates (IRS) and other adaptor proteins to the receptor complex (Bole-Feysot et al. 1998).<br><br>Female homozygous PRLR knockout mice are completely infertile and show a lack of mammary development (Ormandy et al. 1997). Hemizogotes are unable to lactate following their first pregnancy and depending on the genetic background, this phenotype can persist through subsequent pregnancies (Kelly et al. 2001).
R-HSA-70688	Proline catabolism	Proline is catabolized in two steps to yield L-glutamate gamma-semialdehyde, which can react further with glutamate to yield ornithine and alpha-ketoglutarate (annotated as a reaction of amino acid synthesis and interconversion) or with NAD+ to yield glutamate and NADH + H+ (Phang et al. 2001).
R-HSA-169893	Prolonged ERK activation events	After NGF binding, activated Trk receptors provide multiple docking sites for adaptor proteins and enzymes. Two docking proteins, the Ankyrin-Rich Membrane Spanning protein (ARMS/Kidins220) and Fibroblast growth factor receptor substrate 2 (Frs2), target signaling molecules in response to NGF stimulation and link receptor activation with the MAP kinase (also called the Extracellular signal-Regulated Kinase cascade, ERK) cascade, an essential process for growth factor-induced cell proliferation and differentiation.<br>A feature of NGF signaling is the sustained activation of the MAPK cascade. This is achieved by the small G protein, Rap1 which binds to and activates B-Raf, an activator of the MAPK cascade. Rap1 is a member of the Ras family of G proteins and like all G proteins, Rap1 is in an inactive state when bound to GDP and is active when bound to GTP. A specific GEF (guanine nucleotide exchange factor) called C3G can activate Rap1 by exchanging GDP for GTP.
R-HSA-71032	Propionyl-CoA catabolism	Propionyl-CoA is a product of the catabolism of the amino acids, leucine, methionine, and threonine, and of the beta-oxidation of fatty acids with odd numbers of carbon atoms. The three reactions of this pathway convert propionyl-CoA to succinyl-CoA, an intermediate of the citric acid cycle. Through these reactions, carbon atoms from these sources can be fully oxidized to produce energy, or can be directed to gluconeogenesis. The three reactions of propionyl-CoA catabolism take place in the mitochondrial matrix.
R-HSA-392851	Prostacyclin signalling through prostacyclin receptor	Prostacyclin (PGI2) is continuously produced by healthy vascular endothelial cells. It inhibits platelet activation through interaction with the Gs-coupled receptor PTGIR, leading to increased cAMP, a consequent increase in cAMP-dependent protein kinase activity which prevents increases of cytoplasmic [Ca2+] necessary for activation (Woulfe et al. 2001). PGI2 is also an effective vasodilator. These effects oppose the effects of thromboxane (TXA2), another eicosanoid, creating a balance of blood circulation and platelet activation.
R-HSA-391908	Prostanoid ligand receptors	Fatty acid cyclo-oxygenase (COX) converts arachidonic acid to prostaglandin H2 (PGH2) from which the prostanoids PGD2, PGE2, PGF2alpha, PGI2 (prostacyclin) and thromboxane A2 (TXA2) are derived. Based on the agonist potencies, five prostanoid receptors are recognized and correspondingly named DP, EP, FP, IP and TP receptors (Coleman RA et al, 1994). Additionally, EP receptors contains four subtypes, termed EP1, EP2, EP3 and EP4; the DP receptor also has two subtypes, DP1 and DP2 (CRTH2).
R-HSA-391251	Protein folding	Due to the crowded envirnoment within the cell, many proteins must interact with molecular chaperones to attain their native conformation (reviewed in Young et al., 2004). Chaperones recognize and associate with proteins in their non-native state and facilitate their folding by stabilizing the conformation of productive folding intermediates. Chaperones that take part broadly in de novo protein folding, such as the Hsp70s and the chaperonins, facilitate the folding process through cycles of substrate binding and release regulated by their ATPase activity (see Young et al., 2004; Spiess et al., 2004; Bigotti and Clarke, 2008).
R-HSA-433692	Proton-coupled monocarboxylate transport	The SLC16A gene family encode proton-linked monocarboxylate transporters (MCT) which mediate the transport of monocarboxylates such as lactate and pyruvate. Monocarboxylates are a major energy source for all cells in the body so their transport in and out of cells is crucial for cellular function. To date, 14 SLC16A members have been identified through sequence homology. Of these 14 members, only seven isoforms have been functionally characterized and not all of these function as proton-coupled transporters. A number can transport diuretics, thyroid hormones and aromatic amino acids. The seven remaining SLC16A members are classed as orphan MCTs (Morris ME and Felmlee MA, 2008; Merezhinskaya N and Fishbein WN, 2009).
R-HSA-428559	Proton-coupled neutral amino acid transporters	The human SLC36A gene family encodes four proton-coupled neutral amino acid transporters, PAT1-4. PAT1 and 2 mediate electroneutral symport of protons and small neutral amino acids like glycine, alanine and proline. PAT3 and 4 are orphans with unknown function (Boll M et al, 2004).
R-HSA-427975	Proton/oligopeptide cotransporters	The human SLC15 gene family encode four proton-coupled oligopeptide transporters; PEPT1 (SLC15A1), PEPT2 (SLC15A2), PHT2 (SLC15A3) and PHT1 (SLC15A4). These cotransporters are part of the Proton-coupled Oligopeptide Transporter (POT) superfamily (also called Peptide Transporter (PTR) family) (Daniel H and Kottra G, 2004).
R-HSA-5674404	PTEN Loss of Function in Cancer	Loss-of-function mutations affecting the phosphatase domain of PTEN are frequently found in sporadic cancers (Kong et al. 1997, Lee et al. 1999, Han et al. 2000), as well as in PTEN hamartoma tumor syndromes (PHTS) (Marsh et al. 1998). PTEN can also be inactivated by gene deletion or epigenetic silencing, or indirectly by overexpression of microRNAs that target PTEN mRNA (Huse et al. 2009). Cells with deficient PTEN function have increased levels of PIP3, and therefore increased AKT activity. For a recent review, please refer to Hollander et al. 2011.
R-HSA-74259	Purine catabolism	The purine bases guanine and hypoxanthine (derived from adenine by events in the purine salvage pathways) are converted to xanthine and then to uric acid, which is excreted from the body (Watts 1974). The end-point of this pathway in humans and hominoid primates is unusual. Most other mammals metabolize uric acid further to yield more soluble end products, and much speculation has centered on possible roles for high uric acid levels in normal human physiology.
R-HSA-73847	Purine metabolism	The events of human purine metabolism are conveniently, if somewhat arbitrarily, grouped into four pathways: de novo synthesis of inosine 5'-monophosphate (IMP), the biosynthesis of other purine ribo- and deoxyribonucleotides, purine salvage reactions, and purine catabolism (Watts 1974).<P><B>De novo synthesis of inosine 5'-monophosphate (IMP).</B> The purine ribonucleotide IMP is assembled on 5-phospho-alpha-D-ribose 1-diphosphate (PRPP).<P><B>Purine biosynthesis [interconversion].</B> Purine ribo- and deoxyribonucleotide di- and triphosphates are synthesized, both from IMP and from guanosine and adenosine ribo- and deoxyribonucleotide monophosphates generated in salvage reactions. <P><B>Purine salvage reactions.</B> Purine nucleosides and free bases generated by DNA and RNA breakdown are converted to nucleotide monophosphates.<P><B>Purine catabolism.</B> The purine bases guanine and hypoxanthine are degraded to uric acid, which is excreted from the body.
R-HSA-73817	Purine ribonucleoside monophosphate biosynthesis	The purine ribonucleotide inosine 5'-monophosphate (IMP) is assembled on 5-phospho-alpha-D-ribose 1-diphosphate (PRPP), with atoms derived from aspartate, glutamine, glycine, N10-formyl-tetrahydrofolate, and carbon dioxide. Although several of the individual reactions in this sequence are reversible, as indicated by the double-headed arrows in the diagram, other irreversible steps drive the pathway in the direction of IMP synthesis in the normal cell. All of these reactions are thus annotated here only in the direction of IMP synthesis. Guanosine 5'-monophosphate (GMP) and adenosine 5'-monophosphate (AMP) are synthesized from IMP.
R-HSA-74217	Purine salvage	Nucleosides and free bases generated by DNA and RNA breakdown are converted back to nucleotide monophosphates, allowing them to re-enter the pathway of purine biosynthesis. Nucleosides and free bases generated by DNA breakdown are converted back to nucleotide monophosphates, allowing them to re-enter the pathway of purine biosynthesis. Nucleosides and free bases generated by RNA breakdown are converted back to nucleotide monophosphates, allowing them to re-enter the pathways of purine biosynthesis. Under normal conditions, DNA turnover is limited and deoxyribonucleotide salvage operates at a correspondingly low level (Watts 1974).
R-HSA-500753	Pyrimidine biosynthesis	The pyrimidine orotate (orotic acid) is synthesized in a sequence of four reactions, deriving its atoms from glutamine, bicarbonate, and aspartate. A single multifunctional cytosolic enzyme catalyzes the first three of these reactions, while the last one is catalyzed by an enzyme associated with the inner mitochondrial membrane. In two further reactions, catalyzed by a bifunctional cytosolic enzyme, orotate reacts with 1-phosphoribosyl 5-pyrophosphate (PRPP) to yield orotidine 5'-monophosphate, which is decarboxylated to yield uridine 5'-monophosphate (UMP). While several individual reactions in this pathway are reversible, other irreversible reactions drive the pathway in the direction of UMP biosynthesis in the normal cell. All reactions are thus annotated here only in the forward direction.<P>This pathway has been most extensively analyzed at the genetic and biochemical level in hamster cell lines. All three enzymes have also been purified from human sources, however, and the key features of these reactions have been confirmed from studies of this human material (Jones 1980; Webster et al. 2001).<p>All other pyrimidines are synthesized from UMP. The reactions annotaed here, catalyzed by dCMP deaminase and dUTP diphosphatase yield dUMP, which in turn is converted to TMP by thymidylate synthase.
R-HSA-73621	Pyrimidine catabolism	In parallel sequences of three reactions each, thymine is converted to beta-aminoisobutyrate and uracil is converted to beta-alanine. Both of these molecules are excreted in human urine and appear to be normal end products of pyrimidine catabolism (Griffith 1986; Webster et al. 2001). Mitochondrial AGXT2, however, can also catalyze the transamination of both molecules with pyruvate, yielding 2-oxoacids that can be metabolized further by reactions of branched-chain amino acid and short-chain fatty acid catabolism (Tamaki et al. 2000). The importance of these reactions in normal human pyrimidine catabolism has not been well worked out.
R-HSA-73848	Pyrimidine metabolism	The events of human pyrimidine metabolism are conveniently, if somewhat arbitrarily, grouped into four pathways: de novo synthesis of the pyrimidine ring and its conversion to uridine 5'-monophosphate (UMP), the biosynthesis of other pyrimidine ribo- and deoxyribonucleotides, pyrimidine salvage reactions, and pyrimidine catabolism (Loffler et al. 2005).<P><B>De novo synthesis of the pyrimidine ring and its conversion to UMP.</B> The pyrimidine base orotate is synthesized from glutamine, bicarbonate, and aspartate. Orotate reacts with 5-phospho-alpha-D-ribose 1-diphosphate (PRPP) and is then decarboxylated to form the pyrimidine nucleotide UMP.<P><B>Pyrimidine biosynthesis [interconversion].</B> Pyrimidine ribo- and deoxyribonucleotide di- and triphosphates are synthesized, both from UMP and from pyrimidine ribonucleotide monophosphates generated in salvage reactions. <P><B>Pyrimidine salvage reactions.</B> Pyrimidine nucleosides and free bases generated by DNA and RNA breakdown are converted to nucleotide monophosphates.<P><B>Pyrimidine catabolism.</B> The pyrimidine bases thymine and uracil are degraded to beta-aminoisobutyrate and beta-alanine, respectively, which are excreted from the body.
R-HSA-73614	Pyrimidine salvage reactions	In pyrimidine salvage reactions, nucleosides and free bases generated by DNA and RNA breakdown are converted back to nucleotide monophosphates, allowing them to re-enter the pathways of pyrimidine biosynthesis (interconversion).
R-HSA-71737	Pyrophosphate hydrolysis	Many biosynthetic reactions are coupled to the cleavage of ATP to yield AMP and pyrophosphate. These reactions are typically freely reversible when carried out with purified substrates and enzymes in vitro. In vivo, however, the pyrophosphate is rapdily and essentially irreversibly hydrolyzed by a ubiquitous inorganic pyrophosphatase. This hydrolysis has the effect of pulling the first reaction strongly in the direction of biosynthesis, at the expense of two high-energy phosphate bonds. Studies of human cells have identified two forms of the enzyme, one localized to the cytosol and the other to the mitochondrial matrix (Raja et al. 1981).
R-HSA-70268	Pyruvate metabolism	Pyruvate sits at an intersection of key pathways of energy metabolism. It is the end product of glycolysis and the starting point for gluconeogenesis, and can be generated by transamination of alanine. It can be converted by the pyruvate dehydrogenase complex to acetyl CoA (Reed and Hackert 1990) which can enter the TCA cycle or serve as the starting point for the syntheses of long chain fatty acids, steroids, and ketone bodies depending on the tissue and metabolic state in which it is formed. It also plays a central role in balancing the energy needs of various tissues in the body. Under conditions in which oxygen supply is limiting, e.g., in exercising muscle, or in the absence of mitochondria, e.g., in red blood cells, re-oxidation of NADH produced by glycolysis cannot be coupled to generation of ATP. Instead, re-oxidation is coupled to the reduction of pyruvate to lactate. This lactate is released into the blood, and is taken up primarily by the liver, where it is oxidized to pyruvate and can be used for gluconeogenesis (Cori 1981).
R-HSA-71406	Pyruvate metabolism and Citric Acid (TCA) cycle	Pyruvate metabolism and the citric acid (TCA) cycle together link the processes of energy metabolism in a human cell with one another and with key biosynthetic reactions. Pyruvate, derived from the reversible oxidation of lactate or transamination of alanine, can be converted to acetyl CoA. Other sources of acetyl CoA include breakdown of free fatty acids and ketone bodies in the fasting state. Acetyl CoA can enter the citric acid cycle, a major source of reducing equivalents used to synthesize ATP, or enter biosynthetic pathways.<p>In addition to its role in energy generation, the citric acid cycle is a source of carbon skeletons for amino acid metabolism and other biosynthetic processes. One such process included here is the interconversion of 2-hydroxyglutarate, probably derived from porphyrin and amino acid metabolism, and 2-oxoglutarate (alpha-ketoglutarate), a citric acid cycle intermediate.
R-HSA-5365859	RA biosynthesis pathway	The major activated retinoid, all-trans-retinoic acid (atRA) is produced by the dehydrogenation of all-trans-retinol (atROL) by members of the short chain dehydrogenase/reductase (SDR) and aldehyde dehydrogenase (RALDH) gene families (Das et al. 2014, Napoli 2012).
R-HSA-5673000	RAF activation	Mammals have three RAF isoforms, A, B and C, that are activated downstream of RAS and stimulate the MAPK pathway. Although CRAF (also known as RAF-1) was the first identified and remains perhaps the best studied, BRAF is most similar to the RAF expressed in other organisms. Notably, MAPK (ERK) activation is more compromised in BRAF-deficient cells than in CRAF or ARAF deficient cells (Bonner et al, 1985; Mikula et al, 2001, Huser et al, 2001, Mercer et al, 2002; reviewed in Leicht et al, 2007; Matallanas et al, 2011; Cseh et al, 2014). Consistent with its important role in MAPK pathway activation, mutations in the BRAF gene, but not in those for A- or CRAF, are associated with cancer development (Davies et al, 2002; reviewed in Leicht et al, 2007). ARAF and CRAF may have arisen through gene duplication events, and may play additional roles in MAPK-independent signaling (Hindley and Kolch, 2002; Murakami and Morrison, 2001).<br>Despite divergences in function, all mammalian RAF proteins share three conserved regions (CRs) and each interacts with RAS and MEK proteins, although with different affinities. The N-terminal CR1 contains a RAS-binding domain (RBD) and a cysteine-rich domain (CRD) that mediate interactions with RAS and the phospholipid membrane. CR2 contains inhibitory phosphorylation sites that impact RAS binding and RAF activation, while the C-terminal CR3 contains the bi-lobed kinase domain with its activation loop, and an adjacent upstream "N-terminal acidic motif" -S(S/G)YY in C- and A-RAF,respectively, and SSDD in B-RAF - that is required for RAF activation (Tran et al, 2005; Dhillon et al, 2002; Chong et al, 2001; Cutler et al, 1998; Chong et al, 2003; reviewed in Matallanas et al, 2011).<br><br>Regulation of RAF activity involves multiple phosphorylation and dephosphorylation events, intramolecular conformational changes, homo- and heterodimerization between RAF monomers and changes to protein binding partners, including scaffolding proteins which bring pathway members together (reviewed in Matallanas et al, 2011; Cseh et al, 2014). The details of this regulation are not completely known and differ slightly from one RAF isoform to another. Briefly, in the inactive state, RAF phosphorylation on conserved serine residues in CR2 promote an interaction with 14-3-3 dimers, maintaining the kinase in a closed conformation. Upon RAS activation, these sites are dephosphorylated, allowing the RAF CRD and RBD to bind RAS and phospholipids, facilitating membrane recruitment. RAF activation requires homo- or heterodimerization, which promotes autophosphorylation in the activation loop of the receiving monomer. Of the three isoforms, only BRAF is able to initiate this allosteric activation of other RAF monomers (Hu et al, 2013; Heidorn et al, 2010; Garnett et al, 2005). This activity depends on negative charge in the N-terminal acidic region (NtA; S(S/G)YY or SSDD) adjacent to the kinase domain. In BRAF, this region carries permanent negative charge due to the presence of the two aspartate residues in place of the tyrosine residues of A- and CRAF. In addition, unique to BRAF, one of the serine residues of the NtA is constitutively phosphorylated. In A- and CRAF, residues in this region are subject to phosphorylation by activated MEK downstream of RAF activation, establishing a positive feedback loop and allowing activated A- and CRAF monomers to act as transactivators in turn (Hu et al, 2013; reviewed in Cseh et al, 2014). RAF signaling is terminated through dephosphorylation of the NtA region and phosphorylation of the residues that mediate the inhibitory interaction with 14-3-3, promoting a return to the inactive state (reviewed in Matallanas et al, 2011; Cseh et al, 2014).<br>
R-HSA-112409	RAF-independent MAPK1/3 activation	Depending upon the stimulus and cell type mitogen-activated protein kinases (MAPK) signaling pathway can transmit signals to regulate many different biological processes by virtue of their ability to target multiple effector proteins (Kyriakis JM & Avruch J 2012; Yoon and Seger 2006; Shaul YD & Seger R 2007; Arthur JS & Ley SC 2013). In particular, the extracellular signal-regulated kinases MAPK3(ERK1) and MAPK1 (ERK2) are involved in diverse cellular processes such as proliferation, differentiation, regulation of inflammatory responses, cytoskeletal remodeling, cell motility and invasion through the increase of matrix metalloproteinase production (Viala E & Pouyssegur J 2004; Hsu MC et al. 2006; Dawson CW et al.2008; Kuriakose T et al. 2014).The canonical RAF:MAP2K:MAPK1/3 cascade is stimulated by various extracellular stimuli including hormones, cytokines, growth factors, heat shock and UV irradiation triggering the GEF-mediated activation of RAS at the plasma membrane and leading to the activation of the RAF MAP3 kinases. However, many physiological and pathological stimuli have been found to activate MAPK1/3 independently of RAF and RAS (Dawson CW et al. 2008; Wang J et al. 2009; Kuriakose T et al. 2014). For example, AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK), but not RAF1, was reported to regulate MAP2K1/2 and MAPK1/3 (MEK and ERK) activation in rat hepatoma H4IIE and human erythroleukemia K562 cells in response to autophagy stimuli (Wang J et al. 2009). Tumor progression locus 2 (TPL2, also known as MAP3K8 and COT) is another MAP3 kinase which promotes MAPK1/3 (ERK)-regulated immune responses downstream of toll-like receptors (TLR), TNF receptor and IL1beta signaling pathways (Gantke T et al. 2011).<p>In response to stimuli the cell surface receptors transmit signals inducing MAP3 kinases, e.g., TPL2, MEKK1, which in turn phosphorylate MAP2Ks (MEK1/2). MAP2K then phosphorylate and activate the MAPK1/3 (ERK1 and ERK2 MAPKs). Activated MAPK1/3 phosphorylate and regulate the activities of an ever growing pool of substrates that are estimated to comprise over 160 proteins (Yoon and Seger 2006). The majority of ERK substrates are nuclear proteins, but others are found in the cytoplasm and other organelles. Activated MAPK1/3 can translocate to the nucleus, where they phosphorylate and regulate various transcription factors, such as Ets family transcription factors (e.g., ELK1), ultimately leading to changes in gene expression (Zuber J et al. 2000).
R-HSA-5673001	RAF/MAP kinase cascade	The RAS-RAF-MEK-ERK pathway regulates processes such as proliferation, differentiation, survival, senescence and cell motility in response to growth factors, hormones and cytokines, among others. Binding of these stimuli to receptors in the plasma membrane promotes the GEF-mediated activation of RAS at the plasma membrane and initiates the three-tiered kinase cascade of the conventional MAPK cascades. GTP-bound RAS recruits RAF (the MAPK kinase kinase), and promotes its dimerization and activation (reviewed in Cseh et al, 2014; Roskoski, 2010; McKay and Morrison, 2007; Wellbrock et al, 2004). Activated RAF phosphorylates the MAPK kinase proteins MEK1 and MEK2 (also known as MAP2K1 and MAP2K2), which in turn phophorylate the proline-directed kinases ERK1 and 2 (also known as MAPK3 and MAPK1) (reviewed in Roskoski, 2012a, b; Kryiakis and Avruch, 2012). Activated ERK proteins may undergo dimerization and have identified targets in both the nucleus and the cytosol; consistent with this, a proportion of activated ERK protein relocalizes to the nucleus in response to stimuli (reviewed in Roskoski 2012b; Turjanski et al, 2007; Plotnikov et al, 2010; Cargnello et al, 2011). Although initially seen as a linear cascade originating at the plasma membrane and culminating in the nucleus, the RAS/RAF MAPK cascade is now also known to be activated from various intracellular location. Temporal and spatial specificity of the cascade is achieved in part through the interaction of pathway components with numerous scaffolding proteins (reviewed in McKay and Morrison, 2007; Brown and Sacks, 2009). <br> The importance of the RAS/RAF MAPK cascade is highlighted by the fact that components of this pathway are mutated with high frequency in a large number of human cancers. Activating mutations in RAS are found in approximately one third of human cancers, while ~8% of tumors express an activated form of BRAF (Roberts and Der, 2007; Davies et al, 2002; Cantwell-Dorris et al, 2011).
R-HSA-392517	Rap1 signalling	Rap1 (Ras-proximate-1) is a small G protein in the Ras superfamily. Like all G proteins, Rap1 is activated when bound GDP is exchanged for GTP. Rap1 is targeted to lipid membranes by the covalent attachment of lipid moieties to its carboxyl terminus. Movement of Rap1 from endosomal membranes to the plasma membrane upon activation has been reported in several cell types including Jurkat T cells and megakaryocytes. On activation, Rap1 undergoes conformational changes that facilitate recruitment of a variety of effectors, triggering it's participation in integrin signaling, ERK activation, and others.
R-HSA-442982	Ras activation uopn Ca2+ infux through NMDA receptor	Ca2+ influx through the NMDA receptor leads to the activation of Ras kinase via the activation of RasGRF.
R-HSA-975578	Reactions specific to the complex N-glycan synthesis pathway	If MAN2 acts before MGAT3, the pathway progresses to complex N-glycans, because MAN2 is not able to operate on bisected oligosaccharides (11421343, page 5). The expression of MAN2 over MGAT3 in a tissue can regulate the synthesis of hybrid or complex N-glycans.
R-HSA-975574	Reactions specific to the hybrid N-glycan synthesis pathway	The transfer of a bisecting GlcNAc by MGAT3 commits the pathway toward the synthesis of hybrid glycans, because MAN2 is not able to operate on bisected oligosaccharides (Schachter et al 2000, Priatel JJ et al, 1997). The expression of MGAT3 over MGAT2 in a tissue can regulate the synthesis of hybrid toward complex N-glycans. The addition of a GlcNAc between the two arms also prevents the action of MGAT4, MGAT5 and FUT8.
R-HSA-156988	Receptor-ligand binding initiates the second proteolytic cleavage of Notch receptor	Some transmembrane proteins such as the Notch receptor can be cleaved to release a cytosolic domain that translocates to the nucleus to control gene transcription. This is an example of a process called regulated intramembrane proteolysis (Rip). Rip is a control mechanism that is conserved from bacteria to humans and influences processes from cellular differentiation to lipid metabolism.<br>Once the ligand binds with the receptor, a proposed conformational change in the Notch receptor occurs which relieves an inhibition on the S2 protease cleavage site proximal to the plasma membrane. The S2 cleavage is catalyzed by an ADAM metalloprotease called TACE (TNF alpha converting enzyme). This enzyme is a homolog of the Drosophila Kuzbanian gene product which performs the same task. Cleavage at the S2 site generates a transient intermediate peptide termed NEXT (Notch EXtracellular Truncation). The remainder of the Notch receptor is still bound with the ligand at this point.
R-HSA-110330	Recognition and association of DNA glycosylase with site containing an affected purine	The recognition and removal of an altered base by a DNA glycosylase is thought to involve the diffusion of the enzyme along the minor grove of the DNA molecule. The enzyme presumably compresses the backbone of the affected DNA strand at the site of damage. This compression is thought to result in an outward rotation of the damaged residue into a "pocket" of the enzyme that recognizes and cleaves the altered base from the backbone (Slupphaug et al. 1996, Parikh et al. 1998).
R-HSA-110328	Recognition and association of DNA glycosylase with site containing an affected pyrimidine	Base excision repair is initiated by a DNA glycosylase which first recognizes and removes a damaged or incorrect (e.g. mismatched) base (Sokhansanj et al. 2002).
R-HSA-110314	Recognition of DNA damage by PCNA-containing replication complex	Damaged double strand DNA (dsDNA) cannot be successfully used as a template by replicative DNA polymerase delta (POLD) and epsilon (POLE) complexes (Hoege et al. 2002). When the replication complex composed of PCNA, RPA, RFC and POLD or POLE stalls at a DNA damage site, PCNA becomes monoubiquitinated by RAD18 bound to UBE2B (RAD6). POLD or POLE dissociate from monoubiquitinated PCNA, while Y family DNA polymerases - REV1, POLH (DNA polymerase eta), POLK (DNA polymerase kappa) and POLI (DNA polymerase iota) - bind monoubiquitinated PCNA through their ubiquitin binding and PCNA binding motifs, resulting in a polymerase switch and initiation of translesion synthesis (TLS) (Hoege et al. 2002, Friedberg et al. 2005). 
R-HSA-5693565	Recruitment and ATM-mediated phosphorylation of repair and signaling proteins at DNA double strand breaks	Activated ATM phosphorylates a number of proteins involved in the DNA damage checkpoint and DNA repair (Thompson and Schild 2002, Ciccia and Elledge 2010), thereby triggering and coordinating accumulation of DNA DSB repair proteins in nuclear foci known as ionizing radiation-induced foci (IRIF). While IRIFs include chromatin regions kilobases away from the actual DSB site, this Reactome pathway represents simplified foci and events that happen proximal to the DNA DSB ends. In general, proteins localizing to the nuclear foci in response to ATM signaling are cooperatively retained at the DNA DSB site, forming a positive feedback loop and amplifying DNA damage response (Soutoglou and Misteli 2008).<p>Activated ATM phosphorylates the NBN (NBS1) subunit of the MRN complex (MRE11A:RAD50:NBN) (Gatei et al. 2000), as well as the nucleosome histone H2AFX (H2AX) on serine residue S139, producing gamma-H2AFX (gamma-H2AX) containing nucleosomes (Rogakou et al. 1998, Burma et al. 2001). H2AFX is phosphorylated on tyrosine 142 (Y142) under basal conditions (Xiao et al. 2009). After ATM-mediated phosphorylation of H2AFX on S139, tyrosine Y142 has to be dephosphorylated by EYA family phosphatases in order for the DNA repair to proceed and to avoid apoptosis induced by DNA DSBs (Cook et al. 2009). Gamma-H2AFX recruits MDC1 to DNA DSBs (Stucki et al. 2005). After ATM phosphorylates MDC1 (Liu et al. 2012), the MRN complex, gamma-H2AFX nucleosomes, and MDC1 serve as a core of the nuclear focus and a platform for the recruitment of other proteins involved in DNA damage signaling and repair (Lukas et al. 2004, Soutoglou and Misteli 2008).<p>RNF8 ubiquitin ligase binds phosphorylated MDC1 (Kolas et al. 2007) and, in cooperation with HERC2 and RNF168 (Bekker-Jensen et al. 2010, Campbell et al. 2012), ubiquitinates H2AFX (Mailand et al. 2007, Huen et al. 2007, Stewart et al. 2009, Doil et al. 2009) and histone demethylases KDM4A and KDM4B (Mallette et al. 2012).<p>Ubiquitinated gamma-H2AFX recruits UIMC1 (RAP80), promoting the assembly of the BRCA1-A complex at DNA DSBs. The BRCA1-A complex consists of RAP80, FAM175A (Abraxas), BRCA1:BARD1 heterodimer, BRCC3 (BRCC36), BRE (BRCC45) and BABAM1 (MERIT40, NBA1) (Wang et al. 2007, Wang and Elledge 2007)<p>Ubiquitin mediated degradation of KDM4A and KDM4B allows TP53BP1 (53BP1) to associate with histone H4 dimethylated on lysine K21 (H4K20Me2 mark) by WHSC1 at DNA DSB sites (Pei et al. 2011).<p>Once recruited to DNA DSBs, both BRCA1:BARD1 heterodimers and TP53BP1 are phosphorylated by ATM (Cortez et al. 1999, Gatei et al. 2000, Kim et al. 2006, Jowsey et al. 2007), which triggers recruitment and activation of CHEK2 (Chk2, Cds1) (Wang et al. 2002, Wilson and Stern 2008, Melchionna et al. 2000).<p>Depending on the cell cycle stage, BRCA1 and TP53BP1 competitively promote either homology directed repair (HDR) or nonhomologous end joining (NHEJ) of DNA DSBs. HDR through homologous recombination repair (HRR) or single strand annealing (SSA) is promoted by BRCA1 in association with RBBP8 (CtIP), while NHEJ is promoted by TP53BP1 in association with RIF1 (Escribano-Diaz et al. 2013). 
R-HSA-380270	Recruitment of mitotic centrosome proteins and complexes	The mitotic spindle becomes established once centrosomes have migrated to opposite poles and the nuclear envelope has broken down. During this stage, interphase centrosomes mature into mitotic centrosomes recruiting additional gamma TuRC complexes and acquiring mitosis-associated centrosomal proteins including NuMA, Plk1 and CDK11p58 (reviewed in Schatten 2008; Raynaud-Messina and Merdes 2007).
R-HSA-380320	Recruitment of NuMA to mitotic centrosomes	The NuMA protein, which functions as a nuclear matrix protein in interphase (Merdes and Cleveland 1998), redistributes to the cytoplasm following nuclear envelope breakdown where it plays an essential role in formation and maintenance of the spindle poles (Gaglio, et al., 1995; Gaglio, et al., 1996; Merdes et al, 1996). The mitotic activation of NuMA involves Ran-GTP-dependent dissociation from importin (Nachury et al, 2001, Wiese et al, 2001). NuMA is transported to the mitotic poles where it forms an insoluble crescent around centrosomes tethering microtubules into the bipolar configuration of the mitotic apparatus (Merdes et al., 2000; Kisurina-Evgenieva et al, 2004). Although NuMA is not a bona fide constituent of the mitotic centrosome but rather a protein associated with microtubules at the spindle pole, specific splice variants of NuMA have been identified that associate with the centrosome during interphase (Tang et al, 1994). 
R-HSA-159418	Recycling of bile acids and salts	Of the 20-40 grams of bile salts released daily by the liver, all but approximately 0.5 grams are reabsorbed from the intestine, returned to the liver, and re-used. This recycling involves a series of transport processes: uptake by enterocytes mediated by ASBT (SLC10A2), traversal of the enterocyte cytosol mediated by ileal bile acid binding protein (I-BABP - FABP6), efflux from enterocytes mediated by MRP3 (ABCC3), travel through the portal blood as a complex with albumin, and uptake by hepatocytes mediated by Na+-taurocholate transporting protein (NTPC - SLC10A1) and, to a lesser extent by organic anion transporting proteins A, C, and 8 (OATPA - SLCO1A2, OATPC - SLCO1B1, and OATP-8 - SLCO1B3). Once returned to the hepatocyte cytosol, bile acids (generated in the intestine by the action of bacteria on secreted bile salts) are activated by conjugation with coenzyme A, then coupled to glycine or taurine, regenerating bile salts for re-export into the bile, mediated by the bile salt export pump, ABCB11 (Kullak-Ublick et al. 2004; Mihalik et al. 2002; Trauner and Boyer 2003). Unmodified bile salts returned to the hepatocyte cytosol can be re-exported by ABCB11 without further modification.<br>
R-HSA-72731	Recycling of eIF2:GDP	The active eIF2:GTP complex may be formed by direct binding of GTP to free eIF2 or by GDP-GTP exchange on the eIF2:GDP:eIF2B complex. The eIF2:GDP complex binds eIF2B forming an eIF2:GDP:eIF2B intermediate complex. eIF2B is a guanine nucleotide releasing factor required to cause GDP release so that a new GTP molecule can bind and activate eIF2. Phosphorylated eIF2:GDP sequesters all eIF2B as an inactive complex, and thus, reuse of eIF2 is inhibited as a consequence of the tight bond it forms with eIF2B, which prevents nucleotide exchange. Therefore, in the absence of free eIF2B, excess eIF2 remains in its inactive GDP-bound form and protein synthesis slows dramatically.
R-HSA-437239	Recycling pathway of L1	L1 functions in many aspects of neuronal development including axon outgrowth and neuronal migration. These functions require coordination between L1 and the actin cytoskeleton. F-actin continuously moves in a retrograde direction from the P-(peripheral) domain of the growth cone towards the growth cone's C-(central) domain. L1, attached to the actin cytoskeleton via membrane cytoskeletal linkers (MCKs) such as ankyrins (Ankyrin-G, -B and -R) and members of the ERMs (ezrin, radixin, and moesin) family, link this retrograde F-actin flow with extracellular immobile ligands.<br>Forward translocation of growth cone requires not only the CAM-actin linkage but also a gradient of cell substrate adhesion (strong adhesion at the front and weak adhesion at the rear) so that the cytoskeletal machinery is able to pull the cell forward as attachments at the rear are released. This asymmetry is achieved in part by internalizing L1 molecules as they are moved to the rear of the growth cone coupled to retrograde F-actin flow and recycling them to the leading edge plasma membrane.<br>L1 internalization is mediated by phosphorylation and dephosphorylation. The L1 cytoplasmic domain (L1CD) carries an endocytic or sorting motif, YRSLE, that is recognized by the clathrin associated adaptor protein-2 (AP-2). AP-2 binds the YRSLE motif only when its tyrosine is not phosphorylated and triggers L1 endocytosis. SRC kinase associated with lipid rafts in the P-domain membrane phosphorylates L1 molecules on tyrosine-1176, stabilizing them in the plasma membrane. L1 endocytosis is triggered by the dephosphorylation of Y1176 within the C domain. Some of these internalized L1 molecules are transported in an anterograde direction along microtubules for reuse in the leading edge.
R-HSA-418359	Reduction of cytosolic Ca++ levels	During steady state conditions, cytoplasmic [Ca2+] is reduced by the accumulation of Ca2+ in intracellular stores and Ca2+ extrusion.
R-HSA-5218859	Regulated Necrosis	Necrosis has traditionally been considered as a passive, unregulated cell death. However, accumulating evidence suggests that necrosis, like apoptosis, can be executed by genetically controlled and highly regulated cellular process that is morphologically characterized by a loss of cell membrane integrity, intracellular organelles and/or the entire cell swelling (oncosis) (Rello S et al. 2005; Galluzzi L et al. 2007; Berghe TV et al. 2014). The morphological hallmarks of the nectotic death have been associated with different forms of programmed cell death including (but not limited to) parthanatos, necroptosis, glutamate-induced oxytosis, ferroptosis, inflammasome-mediated necrosis etc. Each of them can be triggered under certain pathophysiological conditions. For example UV, ROS or alkylating agents may induce poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase 1 (PARP1) hyperactivation (parthanatos), while tumor necrosis factor (TNF) or toll like receptor ligands (LPS and dsRNA) can trigger necrosome-mediated necroptosis. The initiation events, e.g., PARP1 hyperactivation, necrosome formation, activation of NADPH oxidases, in turn trigger one or several common intracellular signals such as NAD+ and ATP-depletion, enhanced Ca2+ influx, dysregulation of the redox status, increased production of reactive oxygen species (ROS) and the activity of phospholipases. These signals affect cellular organelles and membranes leading to osmotic swelling, massive energy depletion, lipid peroxidation and the loss of lysosomal membrane integrity. Regulated or programmed necrosis eventually leads to cell lysis and release of cytoplasmic content into the extracellular region that is often associated with a tissue damage resulting in an intense inflammatory response.<p>The Reactome module describes necroptosis as the most characterized form of regulated necrosis. The molecular mechanisms behind the other types of regulated necrosis as well as interconnectivity among them need further studies.
R-HSA-193692	Regulated proteolysis of p75NTR	p75NTR undergoes a process of regulated intramembrane proteolysis (RIP) similar to other transmembrane proteins such as NOTCH, beta-amyloid precursor protein (APP), and ERBB4. Each of these proteins is subjected to two sequential cleavages. The first one occurs in the extracellular part of the protein and is mediated by the metalloproteinase alpha-secretase which causes shedding of the extracellular domain. The second cleavage occurs in the intramembrane region and is mediated by gamma-secretase and causes release of the intracellular domain, ICD, and of a small peptide. The ICD often traffics to the nucleus and, in some instances (e.g. NOTCH), was found to act as transcriptional regulator. Whether the p75NTR ICD does translocate to the nucleus to regulate gene expression in a way similar to the NOTCH receptor remains to be seen. The alpha- and gamma-secretase mediated cleavage of p75 appears to be regulated by neurotrophin (NGF, BDNF) binding to TRKA or TRKB. p75NTR processing also occurs in response to MAG in cerebellar granule neurons.
R-HSA-3371378	Regulation by c-FLIP	c-FLIP proteins (CASP8 and FADD-like apoptosis regulators or c-FLICE inhibitory proteins) are death effector domain (DED)-containing proteins that are recruited to the death-inducing signaling complex (DISC) to regulate activation of caspases-8. Three out of 13 distinct spliced variants of c-FLIP had been found to be expressed at the protein level, the 26 kDa short form FLIP(S), the 24 kDa form FLIP(R), and the 55 kDa long form FLIP(L) (Irmler M et al. 1997; Shu HB et al. 1997; Srinivasula SM et al. 1997; Scaffidi C et al. 1999; Golks A et al. 2005; Haag C et al. 2011)<p>All c-FLIP proteins carry two DEDs at their N termini, which can bind FADD and procaspase-8. In addition to two DEDs, FLIP(L) contains a large (p20) and a small (p12) caspase-like domain without catalytic activity. FLIP(S) and FLIP(R) consist of two DEDs and a small C terminus. Depending on its level of expression FLIP(L) may function as an anti-apoptotic or pro-apoptotic factor, while FLIP(S) and FLIP(R) protect cells from apoptosis by blocking the processing of caspase-8 at the receptor level (Scaffidi C et al. 1999; Golks A et al. 2005; Toivonen HT et al. 2011; Fricker N et al. 2010).
R-HSA-3248023	Regulation by TREX1	Three prime repair exonuclease 1 (TREX1) is a DNase type III enzyme, which targets and digests unpaired nucleotides on ssDNA and dsDNA ends through a 3'to 5' exonuclease activity (Perrino FW et al. 1994; de Silva U et al. 2007; Lehtinen DA et al. 2008; Fye JM et al 2011). TREX1 is an endoplasmic reticulum (ER)-associated protein, which is anchored to ER membrane via the C-terminal transmembrane domain (Chowdhury D et al. 2006; Richards A et al. 2007; Stetson DB et al. 2009). TREX1 has been implicated in innate immune responses against self (damaged or retrotransposons-derived DNA) and retroviral-derived DNA (Stetson DB et al. 2009; Yan N et al. 2010; Hasan M et al. 2012). TREX1 deficiency in human and mouse cells led to accumulation of cytosolic DNA which resulted in a continual activation of cytosolic DNA-sensors. In addition, cells lacking TREX1 function were less susceptible to infection with different types of RNA viruses (Yan N et al. 2010; Hasan M et al. 2012).Thus, the physiological role of the exonuclease TREX1 is to digest cytosolic host DNA to avoid autoimmunity. Loss-of-function mutations in the gene encoding human TREX1 are associated with several autoimmune diseases (Aicardi-Goutieres syndrome (AGS), familial chilblain lupus (FCL), systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE)) that result in increased levels of interferon and circulating antibodies to DNA (Crow YJ et al. 2006; Rice G et al. 2007; Lee-Kirsch MA et al. 2007). During infection with human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) or other RNA viruses, TREX1 activity may inhibit the innate immune responses by processing viral DNA generated during reverse transcription (Yan N et al. 2010; Hasan M et al. 2012). It's not yet known whether TREX1 is also involved in regulation of host responses to DNA viruses.<p>Detection of nucleic acids is known to launch signaling cascades leading to induction of type I interferons, which in turn orchestrate an immune response that involves the expression of hundreds of interferon-stimulated genes (ISGs). It is interesting to note that interferon(IFN)-independent activation of a subset of ISGs was detected in mouse and human cells lacking functional TREX1 (Hasan M et al. 2012). Hasan et al. have also observed that TREX1-deficiency resulted in an increased lysosomal compartment. Trex1 was found to control mTORC1 activity in mouse embryonic fibroblasts (MEF), which in turn negatively regulates translocation of transcription factor EB (TFEB) to the nucleus thereby controlling lysosomal biogenesis (Hasan M et al. 2012; Roczniak-Ferguson A et al. 2012). The authors linked the altered lysosomal compartment to innate immune responses by suggesting that lysosomal biogenesis (regulated by TFEB and mTORC1) acted upstream of IFN-independent ISG expression (regulated by IRF3 and IRF7) (Hasan M et al. 2012).
R-HSA-2029482	Regulation of actin dynamics for phagocytic cup formation	The actin cytoskeleton is fundamental for phagocytosis and members of the Rho family GTPases RAC and CDC42 are involved in actin cytoskeletal regulation leading to pseudopod extension. Active RAC and CDC42 exert their action through the members of WASP family proteins (WASP/N-WASP/WAVE) and ARP2/3 complex. Actin filaments move from the bottom toward the top of the phagocytic cup during pseudopod extension.
R-HSA-211733	Regulation of activated PAK-2p34 by proteasome mediated degradation	Stimulation of cell death by PAK-2 requires the generation and stabilization of the caspase-activated form, PAK-2p34 (Walter et al., 1998;Jakobi et al., 2003). Levels of proteolytically activated PAK-2p34 protein are controlled by ubiquitin-mediated proteolysis. PAK-2p34 but not full-length PAK-2 is degraded by the 26 S proteasome (Jakobi et al., 2003). It is not known whether ubiquitination and degradation of PAK-2p34 occurs in the cytoplasm or in the nucleus.
R-HSA-176408	Regulation of APC/C activators between G1/S and early anaphase	The APC/C is activated by either Cdc20 or Cdh1. While both activators associate with the APC/C, they do so at different points in the cell cycle and their binding is regulated differently (see Zachariae and Nasmyth, 1999). Cdc20, whose protein levels increase as cells enter into mitosis and decrease upon mitotic exit, only associates with the APC/C during M phase. Cdh1 associates with the APC/C in G1. This interaction is inhibited at other times by Cdk1 phosphorylation.
R-HSA-169911	Regulation of Apoptosis	A regulated balance between cell survival and apoptosis is essential for normal development and homeostasis of multicellular organisms (see Matsuzawa, 2001). Defects in control of this balance may contribute to autoimmune disease, neurodegeneration and cancer. Protein ubiquitination and degradation is one of the major mechanisms that regulate apoptotic cell death (reviewed in Yang and Yu 2003).
R-HSA-186712	Regulation of beta-cell development	The normal development of the pancreas during gestation has been intensively investigated over the past decade especially in the mouse (Servitja and Ferrer 2004; Chakrabarti and Mirmira 2003). Studies of genetic defects associated with maturity onset diabetes of the young (MODY) has provided direct insight into these processes as they take place in humans (Fajans et al. 2001). During embryogenesis, committed epithelial cells from the early pancreatic buds differentiate into mature endocrine and exocrine cells. It is helpful to schematize this process into four consecutive cellular stages, to begin to describe the complex interplay of signal transduction pathways and transcriptional networks. The annotations here are by no means complete - factors in addition to the ones described here must be active, and even for the ones that are described, only key examples of their regulatory effects and interactions have been annotated.<p>It is also important to realize that in the human, unlike the mouse, cells of the different stages can be present simultaneously in the developing pancreas and the linear representation of these developmental events shown here is an over-simplification of the actual developmental process (e.g., Sarkar et al. 2008).<p>The first stage of this process involves the predifferentiated epithelial cells of the two pancreatic anlagen that arise from the definitive endoderm at approximately somite stages 11-15 and undergo budding from somite stages 20-22. This period corresponds to gestational days 8.75-9.5 in the mouse, and 26 in the human.<p>Pancreatic buds subsequently coalesce to form a single primitive gland, while concomitantly a ductal tree lined by highly proliferative epithelial cells is formed. A subset of such epithelial cells is thought to differentiate into either endocrine or acinar exocrine cells. A third cellular stage is defined by the endocrine-committed progenitors that selectively express the basic helix-loop-helix transcription factor NEUROG3. NEUROG3 is known to activate a complex transcriptional network that is essential for the specification of endocrine cells. Many transcription factors that are activated by NEUROG3 are also involved in islet-subtype cellular specification and in subsequent stages of differentiation of endocrine cells. This transient cellular stage thus leads to the generation of all known pancreatic endocrine cells, including insulin-producing beta-cells, and glucagon-producing alpha cells, the final stage of this schematic developmental process.<p>The diagram below summarizes interactions that take place between transcription factors and transcription factor target genes during these cellular stages, and shows cases where there is both functional evidence that a transcription factor is required for the target gene to be expressed, and biochemical evidence that this interaction is direct. We also describe instances where a signaling pathway is known to regulate a transcription factor gene in this process, even if the intervening signaling pathway is not fully understood.
R-HSA-1655829	Regulation of cholesterol biosynthesis by SREBP (SREBF)	Sterol regulatory element binding proteins (SREBPs, SREBFs) respond to low cholesterol concentrations by transiting to the nucleus and activating genes involved in cholesterol and lipid biosynthesis (reviewed in Brown and Goldstein 2009, Osborne and Espenshade 2009, Weber et al. 2004).<br> Newly synthesized SREBPs are transmembrane proteins that bind SCAP in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) membrane. SCAP binds cholesterol which causes a conformational change that allows SCAP to interact with INSIG, retaining the SCAP:SREBP complex in the ER. INSIG binds oxysterols, which cause INSIG to bind SCAP and retain SCAP:SREBP in the endoplasmic reticulum.<br>In low cholesterol (below about 5 mol%) SCAP no longer interacts with cholesterol or INSIG and binds Sec24 of the CopII coat complex instead. Thus SCAP:SREBP transits with the CopII complex from the ER to the Golgi. In the Golgi SREBP is cleaved by S1P and then by S2P, releasing the N-terminal fragment of SREBP into the cytosol. The N-terminal fragment is imported to the nucleus by importin-beta and then acts with other factors, such as SP1 and NF-Y, to activate transcription of target genes. Targets of SREBP include the genes encoding all enzymes of cholesterol biosynthesis and several genes involved in lipogenesis. SREBP2 most strongly activates cholesterol biosynthesis while SREBP1C most strongly activates lipogenesis.
R-HSA-428542	Regulation of Commissural axon pathfinding by Slit and Robo	Commissural axons project to the floor plate, attracted by the interaction of their DCC receptors with netrin1 produced by floor plate cells. The axons are insensitive to the repulsive action of slit despite expression of repulsive slit receptors (Robo1 and Robo2) because they also express Robo3, a slit receptor that suppresses the activity of Robo1 and Robo2. Once an axon enters the floor plate, however, it must be efficiently expelled on the contralateral side. Based on studies in Xenopus neurons and by yeast two hybrid screens it is observed that the attractive response of the axons to netrins is silenced by activation of Robo. Slit bound Robo binds to DCC, preventing it from transducing an attractive response to netrin. A switch from attraction to repulsion allows commissural axons to enter and then leave the CNS midline. Upon crossing the midline, commissural axons downregulate expression of Robo3 and increases expression of Robo1/Robo2.
R-HSA-977606	Regulation of Complement cascade	Two inherent features of complement activation make its regulation very important: <br>1. There is an inherent positive feedback loop because the product of C3 activation forms part of an enzyme that causes more C3 activation.<br>2. There is continuous low-level activation of the alternative pathway (see Spontaneous hydrolysis of C3 thioester).<br><br>Complement cascade activation is regulated by a family of related proteins termed the regulators of complement activation (RCA). These are expressed on healthy host cells. Most pathogens do not express RCA proteins on their surface, but many have found ways to evade the complement system by stably binding the RCA that circulates in human plasma (Lambris et al. 2008); trapping RCA is by far the most widely employed strategy for avoiding the complement response. RCA recruitment is common in bacteria such as E. coli and streptococci (Kraiczy & Wurzner 2006) and has also been described for viruses, fungi and parasites. RCA deposition and the complement system also have an important role in tissue homeostasis, clearing dead cells and debris, and preventing damage from oxidative stress (Weismann et al. 2011).<br><br>RCA proteins control complement activation in two different ways; by promoting the irreversible dissociation (decay acceleration) of complement convertases and by acting as cofactors for Complement factor I (CFI)-mediated cleavage of C3b and C4b.<br>Decay accelerating factor (DAF, CD55), Complement factor H (FH), Membrane Cofactor Protein (MCP) and Complement receptor 1 (CR1) are composed of arrays of tandem globular domains termed CCPs (complement control protein repeats) or SCRs (short consensus repeats). CR1, MCP and FH are cofactors for the CFI-mediated cleavage of C3b, generating iC3b. CR1 and MCP are also cofactors for C4b cleavage.<br> C4BP is an additional cofactor for the CFI-mediated cleavage of C4b.
R-HSA-446388	Regulation of cytoskeletal remodeling and cell spreading by IPP complex components	The PINCH-ILK-Parvin complexes function in transducing diverse signals from ECM to intracellular effectors. Interacting partners for components of these complexes have been identified, a number of which regulate and/or mediate its functions in cytoskeletal remodeling and cell spreading (reviewed in Wu, 2004).
R-HSA-69304	Regulation of DNA replication	DNA replication is regulated at various levels via ORC proteins. This pathway includes annotation of individual events that lead to the regulation of replication.
R-HSA-4641263	Regulation of FZD by ubiquitination	WNT responsiveness is influenced by expression levels of FZD and LRP proteins. Levels of these receptors at the cell surface are regulated in part by endocytosis, but the mechanisms are not fully elucidated (Garliardi et al, 2008). A number of recent studies have identified a role for ubiquitination in the localization and turnover of WNT receptors at the plasma membrane. ZNRF3 and RNF43 are E3 ligases that have been shown to ubiquitinate FZD proteins and promote their lysosomal degradation, while the deubiquitinating enzyme USP8 promotes recycling of the receptor back to the plasma membrane (Hao et al, 2012; Mukai et al, 2010). This balance of ubiquitination and deubiquitination is in turn regulated by the R-spondin (RSPO) proteins, agonists of WNT signaling which appear to act by downregulating ZNRF3 and RNF43, thus potentiating both canonical and non-canonical pathways (Hao et al, 2012; reviewed in Abo and Clevers, 2012; Fearon and Spence, 2012, Papartriantafyllou, 2012).
R-HSA-191650	Regulation of gap junction activity	Src is believed to suppress gap junction communication by phosphorylating Cx43.
R-HSA-1234158	Regulation of gene expression by Hypoxia-inducible Factor	HIF-alpha (HIF1A, HIF2A (EPAS1), HIF3A) is translocated to the nucleus, possibly by two pathways: importin 4/7 (Chachami et al. 2009) and importin alpha/beta (Depping et al. 2008). Once in the nucleus HIF-alpha heterodimerizes with HIF-beta (ARNT) (Wang et al. 1995, Jiang et al. 1996, Tian et al. 1997, Gu et al. 1998, Erbel et al. 2003) and recruits CBP and p300 to promoters of target genes (Ebert and Bunn 1998, Kallio et al. 1998, Ema et al. 1999, Gu et al. 2001, Dames et al. 2002, Freedman et al. 2002).
R-HSA-210745	Regulation of gene expression in beta cells	Two transcription factors, PDX1 and HNF1A, play key roles in maintaining the gene expression pattern characteristic of mature beta cells in the endocrine pancreas. Targets of these regulatory molecules include genes encoding insulin, the GLUT2 glucose transporter, the liver- (and pancreas) specific form of pyruvate kinase and other transcription factors including HNF4A, HNF4G, and FOXA3. PDX1 expression in turn is controlled by the activities of MAFA, FOXA2, and PAX6, and negatively regulated via AKT (Chakrabarti and Mirmira 2003; Servitja and Ferrer 2004).
R-HSA-210747	Regulation of gene expression in early pancreatic precursor cells	The properties of transcriptional networks early in the differentiation of human pancreatic cells are inferred from the properties of well-studied networks in mouse models. In mice, the first visible sign of pancreatic development is the appearance of pancreatic buds at about embryonic day 9. The cells in these buds are already committed to differentiate into specialized cells of the exocrine and endocrine pancreas. Expression of transcription factors including Hnf1b, Hnf6, and Pdx1, as well as responsiveness to Fgf10 (fibroblast growth factor 10), up-regulates the expression of factors including Ptf1, Onecut3, Lrh1, and Nkx6.1 (Servitja and Ferrer 2004; Chakrabarti and Mirmira 2003).
R-HSA-210746	Regulation of gene expression in endocrine-committed (NEUROG3+) progenitor cells	Studies in mouse model systems indicate that the transcription factor neurogenin 3 plays a central role in the induction of endocrine differentiation in the developing pancreas (Servitja and Ferrer 2004; Chakrabarti and Mirmira 2003). In both mice and humans critical events in this induction process include the neurogenin 3 (NEUROG3)-dependent transcription of PAX4, NEUROD1, NKX2-2, and INSM1.
R-HSA-210744	Regulation of gene expression in late stage (branching morphogenesis) pancreatic bud precursor cells	The properties of transcriptional networks in late stage (branching morphogenesis) pancreatic bud precursor cells are inferred from the properties of well-studied networks in mouse models. In mice, committed but undifferentiated epithelial cells are organized into branching ductal structures. At a molecular level, expression of Pdx1, Nkx2.2, and Nkx6.1 is reduced while Hnf6 expression remains high. Hnf6 mediates the continued expression of Onecut3 and Hnf1 beta and epithelial cell proliferation. As expression of Ngn3 (corresponds to human NEUROG3) rises, endocrine differentiation of the epithelial cells begins (Servitja and Ferrer 2004; Chakrabarti and Mirmira 2003).
R-HSA-170822	Regulation of Glucokinase by Glucokinase Regulatory Protein	Glucokinase (GCK1) is negatively regulated by glucokinase regulatory protein (GKRP), which reversibly binds the enzyme to form an inactive complex. Binding is stimulated by fructose 6-phosphate and sorbitol 6-phosphate (hence high concentrations of these molecules tend to reduce GCK1 activity) and inhibited by fructose 1-phosphate (hence a high concentration of this molecule tends to increase GCK1 activity). Once formed, the complex is translocated to the nucleus. In the presence of high glucose concentrations, the nuclear GCK1:GKRP complex dissociates, freeing GCK1 to return to the cytosol. The free GKRP is thought also to return to the cytosol under these conditions, but this return has not been confirmed experimentally. Possible physiological roles for this sequestration process are to decrease futile cycling between glucose and glucose 6 phosphate in hepatocytes under low-glucose conditions, and to decrease the lag between a rise in intracellular glucose levels and the onset of glucose phosphorylation in both hepatocytes and pancreatic beta cells (Brocklehurst et al. 2004; Shiota et al. 1999).
R-HSA-3371453	Regulation of HSF1-mediated heat shock response	The ability of HSF1 to respond to cellular stresses is under negative regulation by chaperones, modulation of nucleocytoplasmic shuttling, post-translational modifications and transition from monomeric to trimeric state.
R-HSA-1234174	Regulation of Hypoxia-inducible Factor (HIF) by oxygen	In the presence of oxygen members of the transcription factor family HIF-alpha, comprising HIF1A, HIF2A (EPAS1), and HIF3A, are hydroxylated on proline residues by PHD1 (EGLN2), PHD2 (EGLN1), and PHD3 (EGLN3) and on asparagine residues by HIF1AN (FIH) (reviewed in Pouyssegur et al. 2006, Semenza 2007, Kaelin and Ratcliffe 2008, Nizet and Johnson 2009, Brahimi-Horn and Pouyssegur 2009, Majmundar et al. 2010, Loenarz and Schofield 2011). Both types of reaction require molecular oxygen as a substrate and it is probable that at least some HIF-alpha molecules carry both hydroxylated asparagine and hydroxylated proline (Tian et al. 2011).<br>Hydroxylated asparagine interferes with the ability of HIF-alpha to interact with p300 and CBP while hydroxylated proline facilitates the interaction of HIF-alpha with the E3 ubiquitin ligase VHL, causing ubiquitination and proteolysis of HIF-alpha. Hypoxia inhibits both types of hydroxylation, resulting in the stabilization of HIF-alpha, which then enters the nucleus, binds HIF-beta, and recruits p300 and CBP to activate target genes such as EPO and VEGF.
R-HSA-912694	Regulation of IFNA signaling	There are several proteins and mechanisms involved in controlling the extent of ligand stimulation of IFNA/B signaling. These mechanisms can effect every step of the IFNA/B cascade. Dephosphorylation of JAK and STAT by SHP protein phosphatases, inhibition of STAT function in the nucleus by protein inhibitors of activated STATs (PIAS) proteins, inhibition of tyrosine kinase activity of JAKs by SOCS as well as inhibition of JAK and IFNAR2 interaction by UBP43 are few of the negative regulation mechanisms in controling type I IFN signaling.
R-HSA-877312	Regulation of IFNG signaling	At least three different classes of negative regulators exist to control the extent of INFG stimulation and signaling. These include the feedback inhibitors belonging to protein family suppressors of cytokine signaling (SOCS), the Scr-homology 2 (SH2)-containing protein tyrosine phosphatases (SHPs), and the protein inhibitors of activated STATs (PIAS). The induction of these regulators seems to be able to stop further signal transduction by inhibiting various steps in IFNG cascade.
R-HSA-3134975	Regulation of innate immune responses to cytosolic DNA	Innate immune responses are coordinated and regulated to provide an efficient first line of defense against pathogens and at the same time to prevent host self-damage. Here we present some regulatory events involved in the detection of cytosolic nucleic acids.
R-HSA-422356	Regulation of insulin secretion	Pancreatic beta cells integrate signals from several metabolites and hormones to control the secretion of insulin. In general, glucose triggers insulin secretion while other factors can amplify or inhibit the amount of insulin secreted in response to glucose. Factors which increase insulin secretion include the incretin hormones Glucose-dependent insulinotropic polypeptide (GIP and glucagon-like peptide-1 (GLP-1), acetylcholine, and fatty acids. Factors which inhibit insulin secretion include adrenaline and noradrenaline.<p>Increased blood glucose levels from dietary carbohydrate play a dominant role in insulin release from the beta cells of the pancreas. Glucose catabolism in the beta cell is the transducer that links increased glucose levels to insulin release. Glucose uptake and glycolysis generate cytosolic pyruvate; pyruvate is transported to mitochondria and converted both to oxaloacetate which increases levels of TCA cycle intermediates, and to acetyl-CoA which is oxidized to CO2 via the TCA cycle. The rates of ATP synthesis and transport to the cytosol increase, plasma membrane ATP-sensitive inward rectifying potassium channels (KATP channels) close, the membrane depolarizes, and voltage-gated calcium channels in the membrane open (Muoio and Newgard 2008; Wiederkehr and Wollheim 2006).<p>Elevated calcium concentrations near the plasma membrane cause insulin secretion in two phases: an initial high rate within minutes of glucose stimulation and a slow, sustained release lasting longer than 30 minutes. In the initial phase, 50-100 insulin granules already docked at the membrane are exocytosed. Exocytosis is rendered calcium-dependent by Synaptotagmin V/IX, a calcium-binding membrane protein located in the membrane of the docked granule, although the exact action of Synapototagmin in response to calcium is unknown. Calcium also causes a translocation of reserve granules within the cell towards the plasma membrane for release in the second, sustained phase of secretion. Human cells contain L-type (continually reopening), P/Q-type (long burst), R-type (long burst), and T-type (short burst) calcium channels and these partly account for differences between the two phases of secretion. Other factors that distinguish the two phases are not yet fully known (Bratanova-Tochkova et al. 2002; Henquin 2000; MacDonald et al. 2005).
R-HSA-381426	Regulation of Insulin-like Growth Factor (IGF) transport and uptake by Insulin-like Growth Factor Binding Proteins (IGFBPs)	The family of Insulin like Growth Factor Binding Proteins (IGFBPs) share 50% amino acid identity with conserved N terminal and C terminal regions responsible for binding Insulin like Growth Factors I and II (IGF I and IGF II). Most circulating IGFs are in complexes with IGFBPs, which are believed to increase the residence of IGFs in the body, modulate availability of IGFs to target receptors for IGFs, reduce insulin like effects of IGFs, and act as signaling molecules independently of IGFs. About 75% of circulating IGFs are in 1500 220 KDa complexes with IGFBP3 and ALS. Such complexes are too large to pass the endothelial barrier. The remaining 20 25% of IGFs are bound to other IGFBPs in 40 50 KDa complexes. IGFs are released from IGF:IGFBP complexes by proteolysis of the IGFBP. IGFs become active after release, however IGFs may also have activity when still bound to some IGFBPs. IGFBP1 is enriched in amniotic fluid and is produced in the liver under control of insulin (insulin suppresses production). IGFBP1 binding stimulates IGF function. It is unknown which if any protease degrades IGFBP1. IGFBP2 is enriched in cerebrospinal fluid; its binding inhibits IGF function. IGFBP2 is not significantly degraded in circulation. IGFB3, which binds most IGF in the body is enriched in follicular fluid and found in many other tissues. IGFBP 3 may be cleaved by plasmin, thrombin, Prostate specific Antigen (PSA, KLK3), Matrix Metalloprotease-1 (MMP1), and Matrix Metalloprotease-2 (MMP2). IGFBP3 also binds extracellular matrix and binding lowers its affinity for IGFs. IGFBP3 binding stimulates the effects of IGFs. IGFBP4 acts to inhibit IGF function and is cleaved by Pregnancy associated Plasma Protein A (PAPPA) to release IGF. IGFBP5 is enriched in bone matrix; its binding stimulates IGF function. IGFBP5 is cleaved by Pregnancy Associated Plasma Protein A2 (PAPPA2), ADAM9, complement C1s from smooth muscle, and thrombin. Only the cleavage site for PAPPA2 is known. IGFBP6 is enriched in cerebrospinal fluid. It is unknown which if any protease degrades IGFBP6. 
R-HSA-1433559	Regulation of KIT signaling	SCF induced proliferation is negatively regulated by various proteins including SHP1, PKC, CBL, SOCS1, SOCS6 and LNK.
R-HSA-400206	Regulation of lipid metabolism by Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor alpha (PPARalpha)	Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor alpha (PPAR-alpha) is the major regulator of fatty acid oxidation in the liver. PPARalpha is also the target of fibrate drugs used to treat abnormal plasma lipid levels. <br>PPAR-alpha is a type II nuclear receptor (its subcellular location does not depend on ligand binding). PPAR-alpha forms heterodimers with Retinoid X receptor alpha (RXR-alpha), another type II nuclear receptor. PPAR-alpha is activated by binding fatty acid ligands, especially polyunsaturated fatty acids having 18-22 carbon groups and 2-6 double bonds. <br>The PPAR-alpha:RXR-alpha heterodimer binds peroxisome proliferator receptor elements (PPREs) in and around target genes. Binding of fatty acids and synthetic ligands causes a conformational change in PPAR-alpha such that it releases the corepressors and binds coactivators (CBP-SRC-HAT complex, ASC complex, and TRAP-Mediator complex) which initiate transcription of the target genes.<br>Target genes of PPAR-alpha participate in fatty acid transport, fatty acid oxidation, triglyceride clearance, lipoprotein production, and cholesterol homeostasis.
R-HSA-450531	Regulation of mRNA stability by proteins that bind AU-rich elements	RNA elements rich in adenine and uracil residues (AU-rich elements) bind specific proteins which either target the RNA for degradation or, more rarely, stabilize the RNA. The activity of the AU-element binding proteins is regulated, usually by phosphorylation but also by subcellular localization.
R-HSA-5675482	Regulation of necroptotic cell death	A regulated balance between cell survival and cell death is essential for normal development and homeostasis of multicellular organisms. Defects in control of this balance may contribute to autoimmune disease, neurodegeneration and cancer.
R-HSA-350562	Regulation of ornithine decarboxylase (ODC)	Polyamines increase the production of antizyme (AZ). The carboxy-terminal half of antizyme interacts with ODC, generating an inactive AZ:ODC heterodimer complex. A carboxy-terminal domain of ODC is exposed only within the heterodimer, and is the target for subsequent degradation. A domain within the amino-terminal portion of antizyme provides a function needed for efficient degradation of ODC by the proteasome. <br>The proteasome cycle starts with the processing of AZ:ODC, sequestering ODC and then degrading it to peptides but releasing AZ. AZ participates in additional rounds of binding and degradation. Antizyme-mediated inhibition and destruction of ODC reduces synthesis of polyamines. Additionally, antizyme also inhibits polyamine transport into the cell. Antizyme production is reduced, completing the regulatory circuit (Coffino, 2001).<br>The following illustration is adapted from a minireview by Pegg, 2006; J. Biol. Chem., Vol. 281, Issue 21, 14529-14532.
R-HSA-211728	Regulation of PAK-2p34 activity by PS-GAP/RHG10	PS-GAP (RGH10) interacts specifically with caspase-activated PAK-2p34 reducing the ability of PAK-2p34 to induce cell death. This interaction inhibits the kinase activity of PAK-2p34 and changes the localization of PAK-2p34 from the nucleus to the perinuclear region (Koeppel et al., 2004).
R-HSA-2565942	Regulation of PLK1 Activity at G2/M Transition	The kinase activity of PLK1 is required for cell cycle progression as PLK1 phosphorylates and regulates a number of cellular proteins during mitosis. Centrosomic AURKA (Aurora A kinase), catalytically activated through AJUBA facilitated autophosphorylation on threonine residue T288 at G2/M transition (Hirota et al. 2003), activates PLK1 on centrosomes by phosphorylating threonine residue T210 of PLK1, critical for PLK1 activity (Jang et al. 2002), in the presence of BORA (Macurek et al. 2008, Seki et al. 2008). Once activated, PLK1 phosphorylates BORA and targets it for ubiquitination mediated degradation by SCF-beta-TrCP ubiquitin ligases. Degradation of BORA is thought to allow PLK1 to interact with other substrates (Seki, Coppinger, Du et al. 2008, Seki et al. 2008).<br><br>The interaction of PLK1 with OPTN (optineurin) provides a negative-feedback mechanism for regulation of PLK1 activity. Phosphorylated PLK1 binds and phosphorylates OPTN associated with the Golgi membrane GTPase RAB8, promoting dissociation of OPTN from Golgi and translocation of OPTN to the nucleus. Phosphorylated OPTN facilitates the mitotic phosphorylation of the myosin phosphatase subunit PPP1R12A (MYPT1) and myosin phosphatase activation (Kachaner et al. 2012). The myosin phosphatase complex dephosphorylates threonine residue T210 of PLK1 and inactivates PLK1 (Yamashiro et al. 2008).
R-HSA-204174	Regulation of pyruvate dehydrogenase (PDH) complex	The mitochondrial pyruvate dehydrogenase (PDH) complex catalyzes the oxidative decarboxylation of pyruvate, linking glycolysis to the tricarboxylic acid cycle and fatty acid synthesis. PDH inactivation is crucial for glucose conservation when glucose is scarce, while adequate PDH activity is required to allow both ATP and fatty acid production from glucose. The mechanisms that control human PDH activity include its phosphorylation (inactivation) by pyruvate dehydrogenase kinases (PDK 1-4) and its dephosphorylation (activation, reactivation) by pyruvate dehydrogenase phosphate phosphatases (PDP 1 and 2). Isoform-specific differences in kinetic parameters, regulation, and phosphorylation site specificity of the PDKs introduce variations in the regulation of PDC activity in differing endocrine and metabolic states (Sugden and Holness 2003).
R-HSA-5658442	Regulation of RAS by GAPs	The intrinsic GTPase activity of RAS proteins is stimulated by the GAP proteins, of which there are at least 10 in the human genome (reviewed in King et al, 2013). 
R-HSA-912631	Regulation of signaling by CBL	Cbl is an E3 ubiquitin-protein ligase that negatively regulates signaling pathways by targeting proteins for ubiquitination and proteasomal degradation (Rao et al. 2002). Cbl negatively regulates PI3K via this mechanism (Dufour et al. 2008). The binding of Cbl to the p85 subunit of PI3K is mediated at least in part by tyrosine phosphorylation at Y731 (Dufour et al. 2008). Fyn and the related kinases Hck and Lyn are known to be associated with Cbl (Anderson et al. 1997, Hunter et al. 1999). Fyn is proven capable of Cbl Y731 phosphorylation (Hunter et al. 1999).The association of Fyn and Cbl has been described as constitutive (Hunter et al. 1999). CBL further associates with the p85 subunit of PI3K (Hartley et al. 1995, Anderson et al. 1997, Hunter et al. 1997), this also described as constitutive and mediated by the SH3 domain of p85. Binding of the SH2 domain of p85 to a specific phosphorylation site in Cbl is postulated to explain the the increase in Cbl/p85 association seen in activated cells (Panchamoorthy et al 1996) which negatively regulates PI3K activity (Fang et al. 2001). The negative effect of increased Cbl-PI3K interaction is mediated by Y731 of Cbl. Cbl binding increases PI3K ubiquitination and proteasome degradation (Dufour et al. 2008).<br><br><br>Cbl is constitutively associated with Grb in resting hematopoietic cells (Anderson et al. 1997, Odai et al. 1995, Park et al. 1998, Panchamoorthy et al. 1996). Both the SH2 and SH3 domains of Grb2 are involved. Cbl has 2 distinct C-terminal domains, proximal and distal. The proximal domain binds Grb2 in resting and stimulated cells, and in stimulated cells also binds Shc. The distal domain binds the adaptor protein CRKL. Tyrosine phosphorylation of Cbl in response to IL-3 releases the SH3 domain of Grb2 which then is free to bind other molecules (Park et al. 1998). Cbl is tyrosine phosphorylated in response to many cytokines including IL-3, IL-2 (Gesbert et al. 1998) and IL-4 (Ueno et al. 1998). 
R-HSA-1433617	Regulation of signaling by NODAL	Mature NODAL can form heterodimers with LEFTY1, LEFTY2, or CERBERUS. The heterodimers do not activate the NODAL receptor. LEFTY1 and LEFTY2 also bind CRIPTO and CRYPTIC coreceptors and prevent them from interacting with other components of the NODAL receptor. By these mechanisms LEFTY1, LEFTY2, and CERBERUS negatively regulate NODAL signaling (reviewed in Shen 2007, Schier 2009).
R-HSA-350864	Regulation of thyroid hormone activity	The iodothyronine deiodinases (DIO) are dimeric, membrane-bound enzymes that regulate the activity of thyroid hormone by removal of specific iodines from the precursor T4. There are three types of DIOs in humans; types I, II and III (D1, D2 and D3 respectively) which are proteins of about 250 residues that contain a selenocysteine at their active site. Signaling by thyroid hormone can change in individual tissues by this activation or inactivation process, even when serum concentrations of the hormone remain normal. Generally, cell types express just one type of DIO at any one time. The exception is the pituitary gland which expresses all three.
R-HSA-5357905	Regulation of TNFR1 signaling	Tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNFalpha) is an inflammatory cytokine, that activates either cell survival (e.g.,inflammation, proliferation) or cell death upon association with TNF receptor 1 (TNFR1). Stimuli and the cellular context dictate cell fate decisions between survival and death which rely on tightly regulated mechanisms with checkpoints on many levels. TNFR1-mediated NFkappaB activation leads to the pro-survival transcriptional program that is both anti-apoptotic and highly proinflammatory. The constitutive NFkappaB or AP1 activation may lead to excessive inflammation which has been associated with a variety of aggressive tumor types (Jackson-Bernitsas DG et al. 2007; Zhang JY et al. 2007). Thus, the tight regulation of TNFalpha:TNFR1 signaling is required to ensure the appropriate cell response to stimuli. 
R-HSA-444821	Relaxin receptors	Relaxins are part of a family of peptide hormones that diverged from insulin in early vertebrate evolution to form the insulin-like peptides and relaxins, now often referred to as the relaxin peptide family. All are heterodimers; both chains are cleaved from a common propeptide and cross-linked by 2 disulphide bonds. Humans have 3 true relaxins encoded by 3 related genes, plus several more distantly related insulin-like peptide genes. Non-primates have 2 relaxin genes. The major circulating form of relaxin in humans is relaxin-2, equivalent to relaxin-1 in non-primates. Relaxin-3 is very highly conserved. Little is known about human relaxin-1; several of the insulin-like peptides have no known receptor or function. <br> There are 4 human G-protein coupled receptors for relaxin family peptides. Relaxin receptor 1 (RXFP1) and relaxin receptor 2 (RXFP2) are also known as LGR7 and LGR8 respectively, members of the LRR-containing G protein-coupled receptors (LGRs). Relaxin-3 receptor 1 (RXFP3) and Relaxin-3 receptor 2 (RXFP4) are unrelated, having more homology with small peptide receptors such as the somatostatin receptors.
R-HSA-168298	Release	Once the viral envelope has separated from the cell membrane Influenza virus particles are actively released to complete the budding process. HA (hemagglutinin) anchors the virus to the cell by binding to sialic acid-containing receptors on the cell surface. The enzymatic activity of the neuraminidase (NA) protein removes the sialic acid and releases the virus from the host cell. NA activity is also required to remove sialic acid from the carbohydrates present on the viral glycoproteins to prevent the viral particles from aggregating.
R-HSA-111457	Release of apoptotic factors from the mitochondria	Apoptotic factors released from the mitochondria promote apoptosis through several different mechanisms. Cytochrome C participates in Apoptosome driven effector caspase activation while SMAC relieves IAP mediated caspase inhibition.
R-HSA-5362798	Release of Hh-Np from the secreting cell	Cholesterol and palmitoyl-modification of Hh-Np render the ligand highly hydrophobic and results in its close association with the plasma membrane of the producing cell after secretion. Hh-Np tethered in this way may cluster in sterol-rich lipid rafts where it is competent for short-range signaling. Cell surface Hh-Np also interacts with glypican components of the extracellular matrix and this interaction stabilizes the ligand and is required for its lateral spread. Together, clustering into lipid rafts and interaction with HSPGs may favour packaging of ligand into higher order forms required for ligand dispersal.<br> Long-range signaling requires release of Hh-Np from the secreting cell. Release is achieved through a number of possibly overlapping mechanisms. These include oligomerization into micelle-like structures, packaging into lipoprotein particles and interaction with cholesterol-binding adaptor proteins such as DISP and SCUBE2. In addition, Hh-Np can be released from the plasma membrane through proteolytic cleavage: NOTUM is a secreted enzyme that is thought to promote the release of Hh-Np by cleaving the GPI anchor of Hh-associated glypicans, while the transmembrane metalloprotease ADAM17 promotes long-range Hh signaling by removing the palmitoyl- and cholesterol-modified N- and C-termini of the membrane-associated ligand. How all these mechanisms are coordinated remains to be elucidated (reviewed in Briscoe and Therond, 2013; Gallet, 2011).
R-HSA-159782	Removal of aminoterminal propeptides from gamma-carboxylated proteins	Furin is an endopeptidase localized to the Golgi membrane that cleaves many proteins on the carboxyterminal side of the sequence motif Arg-[any residue]-(Lys or Arg)-Arg (Jones et al. 1995; Leduc et al. 1992). In the case of gamma-carboxylated proteins, if this cleavage does not occur, the proteins are still secreted but do not function properly (Bristol et al. 1993; Lind et al. 1997). The aminoterminal fragments, "propeptides", generated in this reaction have no known function; the carboxylated, cleaved proteins are delivered to the cell membrane or secreted from the cell via pathways to be annotated in a future release of Reactome.
R-HSA-69300	Removal of licensing factors from origins	Licensing factors are removed from the origin by various means like biochemical modification (phosphorylation) or by physical association with other proteins. This pathway includes the annotations of events in which the fates of different proteins at the origin are outlined.
R-HSA-69166	Removal of the Flap Intermediate	Two endonucleases, Dna2 and flap endonuclease 1 (FEN-1), are responsible for resolving the nascent flap structure (Tsurimoto and Stillman 1991). The Dna2 endonuclease/helicase in yeast is a monomer of approximately 172 kDa. Human FEN-1 is a single polypeptide of approximately 42 kDa. Replication Protein A regulates the switching of endonucleases during the removal of the displaced flap.
R-HSA-174437	Removal of the Flap Intermediate from the C-strand	Two endonucleases, Dna2 and flap endonuclease 1 (FEN-1), are responsible for resolving the nascent flap structure (Tsurimoto and Stillman 1991). The Dna2 endonuclease/helicase in yeast is a monomer of approximately 172 kDa. Human FEN-1 is a single polypeptide of approximately 42 kDa. Replication Protein A regulates the switching of endonucleases during the removal of the displaced flap.
R-HSA-4641265	Repression of WNT target genes	In the absence of a WNT signal, many WNT target genes are repressed by Groucho/TLE. Groucho was initially identified in Drosophila, where it has been shown to interact with a variety of proteins to repress transcription (reviewed in Turki-Judeh and Courey, 2012). Groucho proteins, including the 4 human homologues (transducin-like enhancer of split (TLE) 1-4), do not bind DNA directly but instead are recruited to target genes through interaction with DNA-binding transcription factors including TCF/LEF (Brantjes et al, 2001; reviewed in Chen and Courey, 2000). Groucho proteins are believed to oligomerize in a manner that depends on an N-terminal glutamine-rich Q domain, and oligomerization may be important for function (Song et al, 2004; Pinto and Lobe, 1996). Groucho/TLE proteins affect levels of gene expression by interacting with the core transcriptional machinery as well as by modfiying chromatin structure through direct interaction with histones and recruitment of histone deacetylases, among other mechanisms (reviewed in Turki-Judeh and Courey, 2012). In addition to the four TLE proteins, human cells also include a truncated TLE-like protein called amino-terminal enhancer of split (AES) which contains the N-terminal Q domain but lacks much of the C-terminal sequence of TLE proteins, including the WD domain which is important for many protein-protein interactions. AES is believed to act as a dominant negative, since it is able to heter-oligomerize with full-length TLE proteins to form non-functional complexes (Brantjes et al, 2001; reviewed in Beagle and Johnson, 2010).
R-HSA-1474165	Reproduction	Human reproduction mixes the genomes of two individuals creating a new organism. The offspring individuals produced by sexual reproduction differ from their parents and from their siblings. Reproduction includes the reproductive system, sperm and egg production (haploid cells), fertilization, and the early stages embryo development.
R-HSA-73933	Resolution of Abasic Sites (AP sites)	Resolution of AP sites can occur through the single nucleotide replacement pathway or through the multiple nucleotide patch replacement pathway, also known as the long-patch base excision repair (BER). Except for the APEX1-independent resolution of AP sites via single nucleotide base excision repair mediated by NEIL1 or NEIL2 (Wiederhold et al. 2004, Das et al. 2006), single nucleotide and multiple-nucleotide patch replacement pathways are both initiated by APEX1-mediated displacement of DNA glycosylases and cleavage of the damaged DNA strand by APEX1 immediately 5' to the AP site (Wilson et al. 1995, Bennett et al. 1997, Masuda et al. 1998). The BER proceeds via the single nucleotide replacement when the AP (apurinic/apyrimidinic) deoxyribose residue at the 5' end of the APEX1-created single strand break (SSB) (5'dRP) can be removed by the 5'-exonuclease activity of DNA polymerase beta (POLB) (Bennett et al. 1997). POLB fills the created single nucleotide gap by adding a nucleotide complementary to the undamaged DNA strand to the 3' end of the SSB. The SSB is subsequently ligated by DNA ligase III (LIG3) which, in complex with XRCC1, is recruited to the BER site by an XRCC1-mediated interaction with POLB (Kubota et al. 1996). BER proceeds via the multiple-nucleotide patch replacement pathway when the AP residue at the 5' end of the APEX1-created SSB undergoes oxidation-related damage (5'ddRP) and cannot be cleaved by POLB (Klungland and Lindahl 1997). Long-patch BER can be completed by POLB-mediated DNA strand displacement synthesis in the presence of PARP1 or PARP2, FEN1 and DNA ligase I (LIG1) (Prasad et al. 2001). When the PCNA-containing replication complex is available, as is the case with cells in S-phase of the cell cycle, DNA strand displacement synthesis is catalyzed by DNA polymerase delta (POLD) or DNA polymerase epsilon (POLE) complexes, in the presence of PCNA, RPA, RFC, APEX1, FEN1 and LIG1 (Klungland and Lindahl 1997, Dianova et al. 2001). It is likely that the 9-1-1 repair complex composed of HUS1, RAD1 and RAD9 interacts with and coordinates components of BER, but the exact mechanism and timing have not been elucidated (Wang et al. 2004, Smirnova et al. 2005, Guan et al. 2007, Balakrishnan et al. 2009). 
R-HSA-110373	Resolution of AP sites via the multiple-nucleotide patch replacement pathway	While the single nucleotide replacement pathway appears to facilitate the repair of most damaged bases, an alternative BER pathway is evoked when the structure of the 5'-terminal sugar phosphate is such that it cannot be cleaved through the AP lyase activity of DNA polymerase beta (POLB). Under these circumstances, a short stretch of residues containing the abasic site is excised and replaced (Dianov et al., 1999). Following DNA glycosylase-mediated cleavage of the damaged base, the endonuclease APEX1 is recruited to the site of damage where it cleaves the 5' side of the abasic deoxyribose residue, as in the single nucleotide replacement pathway. However, POLB then synthesizes the first replacement residue without prior cleavage of the 5'-terminal sugar phosphate, hence displacing this entity. Long-patch BER can be completed by continued POLB-mediated DNA strand displacement synthesis in the presence of PARP1 or PARP2, FEN1 and DNA ligase I (LIG1) (Prasad et al. 2001). When the PCNA-containing replication complex is available, as is the case with cells in the S-phase of the cell cycle, DNA strand displacement synthesis is catalyzed by DNA polymerase delta (POLD) or DNA polymerase epsilon (POLE) complexes, in the presence of PCNA, RPA, RFC, APEX1, FEN1 and LIG1 (Klungland and Lindahl 1997, Dianova et al. 2001). In both POLB-dependent and PCNA-dependent DNA displacement synthesis, the displaced DNA strand containing the abasic sugar phosphate creates a flap structure that is recognized and cleaved by the flap endonuclease FEN1. The replacement residues added by POLB or POLD/POLE are then ligated by the DNA ligase I (LIG1) (Klungland and Lindahl, 1997; Matsumoto et al., 1999).<br><br>
R-HSA-110381	Resolution of AP sites via the single-nucleotide replacement pathway	The single nucleotide replacement pathway of base excision repair appears to facilitate the repair of most damaged bases. Following DNA glycosylase mediated cleavage of the damaged base, the endonuclease APEX1 is recruited to the site of damage where it cleaves the 5' side of the abasic (AP) deoxyribose residue. DNA polymerase beta (POLB) then cleaves the 3' side of the AP sugar phosphate, thus excising the AP residue. APEX1 is subsequently released, the XRCC1:LIG3 complex is recruited, and POLB mediates the synthesis of the replacement residue. Following LIG3 mediated ligation of the replaced residue, the XRCC1:LIG3 complex dissociates from DNA (Lindahl and Wood, 1999). An alternative BER pathway is employed when the structure of the terminal sugar phosphate is such that it cannot be cleaved by the AP lyase activity of POLB.
R-HSA-5693537	Resolution of D-Loop Structures	Once repair synthesis has occurred, the D-loop structure may be resolved either through Holliday junction intermediates or through synthesis-dependent strand-annealing (SDSA) (Prado and Aguilera 2003, Ciccia and Elledge 2010).
R-HSA-5693568	Resolution of D-loop Structures through Holliday Junction Intermediates	D-loops generated after strand invasion and DNA repair synthesis during homologous recombination repair (HRR) can be resolved through Holliday junction intermediates.<p>A D-loop can be cleaved by the complex of MUS81 and EME1 (MUS81:EME1) or MUS81 and EME2 (MUS81:EME2) and resolved without the formation of double Holliday junctions, generating cross-over products. All steps involved in this process have not been elucidated (Osman et al. 2003, Schwartz et al. 2012, Pepe and West 2014).<p>Alternatively, double Holliday junctions can be created by ligation of crossed-strand intermediates. Double Holliday junctions can then be resolved through the action of the BLM helicase complex known as BTRR (BLM:TOP3A:RMI1:RMI2) (Wan et al. 2013, Bocquet et al. 2014). BLM-mediated resolution of Holliday junction intermediates prevents sister chromatid exchange (SCE) between mitotic chromosomes and generates non-crossover products. Mitotic SCE can result in the loss-of-heterozygosity (LOH), which can make the cell homozygous for deleterious recessive mutations (e.g. in tumor suppressor genes) (Wu and Hickson 2003). Double Holliday junctions can also be resolved by cleavage, mediated by GEN1 or the SLX-MUS complex (composed of SLX1A:SLX4 heterodimer and a heterodimer of MUS81 and EME1 or, possibly, EME2). The resolvase activity of GEN1 and SLX-MUS predominantly results in crossover products, with SCE (Fekairi et al. 2009, Wyatt et al. 2013, Sarbajna et al. 2014).
R-HSA-5693554	Resolution of D-loop Structures through Synthesis-Dependent Strand Annealing (SDSA)	In the synthesis-dependent strand-annealing (SDSA) model of D-loop resolution, D-loop strands extended by DNA repair synthesis dissociate from their sister chromatid complements and reanneal with their original complementary strands, resulting in non-crossover products (Mitchel et al. 2010). SDSA is promoted by the DNA helicase RTEL1 (Barber et al. 2008, Uringa et al. 2012). Additional DNA synthesis occurs to fill the remaining single strand gap present in the reannealed DNA duplex. DNA polymerase alpha has been implicated in this late step of DNA repair synthesis (Levy et al. 2009), although RTEL1-mediated recruitment of PCNA-bound DNA polymerases may also be involved (Vannier et al. 2013). The remaining single strand nicks are closed by DNA ligases, possibly LIG1 or LIG3 (Mortusewicz et al. 2006, Puebla-Osorio et al. 2006).
R-HSA-2500257	Resolution of Sister Chromatid Cohesion	The resolution of sister chromatids in mitotic prometaphase involves removal of cohesin complexes from chromosomal arms, with preservation of cohesion at centromeres (Losada et al. 1998, Hauf et al. 2001, Hauf et al. 2005). <br><br> CDK1-mediated phosphorylation of cohesin-bound CDCA5 (Sororin) at threonine T159 provides a docking site for PLK1, enabling PLK1-mediated phosphorylation of cohesin subunits STAG2 (SA2) and RAD21 (Hauf et al. 2005, Dreier et al. 2011, Zhang et al. 2011). Further phosphorylation of CDCA5 by CDK1 results in dissociation of CDCA5 from cohesin complex, which restores the activity of WAPAL in removing STAG2-phosphorylated cohesin from chromosomal arms (Hauf et al. 2005, Gandhi et al. 2006, Kueng et al. 2006, Shintomi and Hirano 2006, Nishiyama et al. 2010, Zhang et al. 2011). <br><br> <br>At centromeres, kinetochore proteins shugoshins (SGOL1 and SGOL2) enable PP2A-B56 (also a kinetochore constituent) to dephosphorylate the STAG2 subunit of centromeric cohesin. Dephosphorylation of STAG2 enables maintenance of centromeric cohesion, thus preventing separation of sister chromatids until anaphase (Salic et al. 2004, Kitajima et al. 2004, Kitajima et al. 2005, Kitajima et al. 2006).
R-HSA-611105	Respiratory electron transport	Mitochondria are often described as the "powerhouse" of a cell as it is here that energy is largely released from the oxidation of food. Reducing equivalents generated from beta-oxidation of fatty acids and from the Krebs cycle enter the electron transport chain (also called the respiratory chain). During a series of redox reactions, electrons travel down the chain releasing their energy in controlled steps. These reactions drive the active transport of protons from the mitochondrial matrix , through the inner membrane to the intermembrane space. The respiratory chain consists of five main types of carrier; flavins, iron-sulfur centres, quinones, cytochromes (heme proteins) and copper. The two main reducing equivalents entering the respiratory chain are NADH and FADH2. NADH is linked through the NADH-specific dehydrogenase whereas FADH2 is reoxidised within succinate dehydrogenase and a ubiquinone reductase of the fatty acid oxidation pathway. Oxygen is the final acceptor of electrons and with protons, is converted to form water, the end product of aerobic cellular respiration. A proton electrochemical gradient (often called protonmotive force) is established across the inner membrane, with positive charge in the intermembrane space relative to the matrix. Protons driven by the proton-motive force, can enter ATP synthase thus returning to the mitochondrial matrix. ATP synthases use this exergonic flow to form ATP in the matrix, a process called chemiosmotic coupling. A by-product of this process is heat generation.<br><br>An antiport, ATP-ADP translocase, preferentially exports ATP from the matrix thereby maintaining a high ADP:ATP ratio in the matrix. The tight coupling of electron flow to ATP synthesis means oxygen consumption is dependent on ADP availability (termed respiratory control). High ADP (low ATP) increases electron flow thereby increasing oxygen consumption and low ADP (high ATP) decreases electron flow and thereby decreases oxygen consumption. There are many inhibitors of mitochondrial ATP synthesis. Most act by either blocking the flow of electrons (eg cyanide, carbon monoxide, rotenone) or uncoupling electron flow from ATP synthesis (eg dinitrophenol). Thermogenin is a natural protein found in brown fat. Newborn babies have a large amount of brown fat and the heat generated by thermogenin is an alternative to ATP synthesis (and thus electron flow only produces heat) and allows the maintenance of body temperature in newborns.<br><br>The electron transport chain is located in the inner mitochondrial membrane and comprises some 80 proteins organized in four enzymatic complexes (I-IV). Complex V generates ATP but has no electron transfer activity. In addition to these 5 complexes, there are also two electron shuttle molecules; Coenzyme Q (also known as ubiquinone, CoQ) and Cytochrome c (Cytc). These two molecules shuttle electrons between the large complexes in the chain.<br><br>How many ATPs are generated by this process? Theoretically, for each glucose molecule, 32 ATPs can be produced. As electrons drop from NADH to oxygen in the chain, the number of protons pumped out and returning through ATP synthase can produce 2.5 ATPs per electron pair. For each pair donated by FADH2, only 1.5 ATPs can be formed. Twelve pairs of electrons are removed from each glucose molecule;<br><br>10 by NAD+ = 25 ATPs<br>2 by FADH2 = 3 ATPs.<br><br>Making a total of 28 ATPs. However, 2 ATPs are formed during the Krebs' cycle and 2 ATPs formed during glycolysis for each glucose molecule therefore making a total ATP yield of 32 ATPs. In reality, the energy from the respiratory chain is used for other processes (such as active transport of important ions and molecules) so under conditions of normal respiration, the actual ATP yield probably does not reach 32 ATPs.<br><br>The reducing equivalents that fuel the electron transport chain, namely NADH and FADH2, are produced by the Krebs cycle (TCA cycle) and the beta-oxidation of fatty acids. At three steps in the Krebs cycle (isocitrate conversion to oxoglutarate; oxoglutarate conversion to succinyl-CoA; Malate conversion to oxaloacetate), a pair of electrons (2e-) are removed and transferred to NAD+, forming NADH and H+. At a single step, a pair of electrons are removed from succinate, reducing FAD to FADH2. From the beta-oxidation of fatty acids, one step in the process forms NADH and H+ and another step forms FADH2.<br><br>Cytoplasmic NADH, generated from glycolysis, has to be oxidized to reform NAD+, essential for glycolysis, otherwise glycolysis would cease to function. There is no carrier that transports NADH directly into the mitochondrial matrix and the inner mitochondrial membrane is impermeable to NADH so the cell uses two shuttle systems to move reducing equivalents into the mitochondrion and regenerate cytosolic NAD+. <br>The first is the glycerol phosphate shuttle, which uses electrons from cytosolic NADH to produce FADH2 within the inner membrane. These electrons then flow to Coenzyme Q. Complex I is bypassed so only 1.5 ATPs can be formed per NADH via this route. The overall balanced equation, summing all the reactions in this system, is<br><br>NADH (cytosol) + H+ (cytosol) + NAD+ (mito.) = NAD+ (cytosol) + NADH (mito.) + H+ (mito.)<br><br>The malate-aspartate shuttle uses the oxidation of malate to generate NADH in the mitochondrial matrix. This NADH can then be fed directly to complex I and thus can form 3 ATPs via the respiratory chain. The overall balanced equation is<br><br>NADH (cytosol) + H+ (cytosol) + FAD (inner memb.) = NAD+ (cytosol) + FADH2 (inner memb.)<br><br>Both of these shuttle systems regenerate cytosolic NAD+.<br><br>The entry point for NADH is complex I (NADH dehydrogenase) and the entry point for FADH2 is Coenzyme Q. The input of electrons from fatty acid oxidation via ubiquinone is complicated and not shown in the diagram.
R-HSA-163200	Respiratory electron transport, ATP synthesis by chemiosmotic coupling, and heat production by uncoupling proteins.	Oxidation of fatty acids and pyruvate in the mitochondrial matrix yield large amounts of NADH. The respiratory electron transport chain couples the re-oxidation of this NADH to NAD+ to the export of protons from the mitochonrial matrix, generating a chemiosmotic gradient across the inner mitochondrial membrane. This gradient is used to drive the synthesis of ATP; it can also be bypassed by uncoupling proteins to generate heat, a reaction in brown fat that may be important in regulation of body temperature in newborn children.
R-HSA-1222499	Response of Mtb to phagocytosis	<i>Mtb</i> encounters a vastly changed environment, soon after it gets internalized by macrophages. The compartment it resides in, the phagosome, is acidified and devoid of important metal ions. It is flooded with reactive oxygen and nitrogen species. And steps will be soon taken by the macrophage to "mature" the phagosome with all kinds of lysosomal digestive enzymes. However, unlike most other bacteria species <i>Mtb.</i> has evolved solutions to each of these threats and, after making sure these are installed, it soon will enter a dormant state (de Chastellier, 2009; Flannagan et al, 2009). A combination of the host defense and the response of the infecting bacillus (active and passive) ensure suppression of bacterial metabolic activity and replication, resulting in a non-replicating state (Russell 2011, Russell et al. 2010). <br><br>
R-HSA-76005	Response to elevated platelet cytosolic Ca2+	Activation of phospholipase C enzymes results in the generation of second messengers of the phosphatidylinositol pathway. The events resulting from this pathway are a rise in intracellular calcium and activation of Protein Kinase C (PKC). Phospholipase C cleaves the phosphodiester bond in PIP2 to form 1,2 Diacylglycerol (DAG) and 1,4,5-inositol trisphosphate (IP3). IP3 opens Ca2+ channels in the platelet dense tubular system, raising intracellular Ca2+ levels. DAG is a second messenger that regulates a family of Ser/Thr kinases consisting of PKC isozymes (Nishizuka 1995). DAG achieves activation of PKC isozymes by increasing their affinity for phospholipid. Most PKC enzymes are also calcium-dependent, so their activation is in synergy with the rise in intracellular Ca2+. Platelets contain several PKC isoforms that can be activated by DAG and/or Ca2+ (Chang 1997).
R-HSA-2453864	Retinoid cycle disease events	The gene defects which cause diseases related to the retinoid cycle are described here (Travis et al. 2007, Palczewski 2010, Fletcher et al. 2011, den Hollander et al. 2008).
R-HSA-975634	Retinoid metabolism and transport	Vitamin A (all-trans-retinol) must be taken up, either as carotenes from plants, or as retinyl esters from animal food. The most prominent carotenes are alpha-carotene, lycopene, lutein, beta-cryptoxanthine, and especially beta-carotene. After uptake they are mostly broken down to retinal. Retinyl esters are hydrolysed like other fats. In enterocytes, retinoids bind to retinol-binding protein (RBP). Transport from enterocytes to the liver happens via chylomicrons (Harrison & Hussain 2001, Harrison 2005).
R-HSA-177504	Retrograde neurotrophin signalling	Neurotrophin-TRK complexes can be internalized and enter signalling vesicles, which travel retrogradely over long distances from distal nerve terminals to neuronal cell bodies. Such retrograde signalling by neurotrophin-TRK complexes regulates survival, synaptogenesis and maintenance of proper neural connectivity. The neurotrophin-TRK complex may use three distinct internalization pathways. Although Clathrin-mediated endocytosys appears to be the major internalization route, it is controversial whether it also represents the dominant pathway for retrograde transport and signalling. Pyncher-mediated endocytosis might be more relevant in this regard. Moreover, also caveolin-mediated endocytosis may play a role in NGF-TrkA internalization.<br>Retrograde transport of TRKs is microtubule-dependent: TRKs remain activated and bound to neurotrophins during retrograde transport. The current view is reflected in the signalling endosome model. It is a specialized vesicle containing ligand (NGF, BDNF) bound to its activated TRK receptor, together with activated downstream signalling proteins, transported by motor proteins (dyneins) from nerve terminals to remote cell bodies, where the receptors trigger signalling cascades.
R-HSA-888593	Reuptake of GABA	Reuptake of GABA from the synapse terminates the action of GABA thus regulating GABA action. GABA taken up from the synapse into the neurons is reused for synaptic loading. GABA taken up by astrocytes is degraded into C02 and glutamine. Glutamine is transported into the neurons for glutamate and GABA synthesis.
R-HSA-165054	Rev-mediated nuclear export of HIV RNA	The HIV-1 genome contains 9 genes encoded by a single transcript. In order for the virus to replicate, unspliced, singly-spliced and fully spliced viral mRNA must be exported from the nucleus. The HIV-1 mRNA splice sites are inefficient resulting it the accumulation of a pool of incompletely spliced RNAs (Staffa and Cochrane, 1994). In the early stages of the viral life cycle, or in the absence of the viral Rev protein, completely spliced viral mRNA which encode the regulatory proteins Tat, Nef and Rev are exported from the nucleus while the incompletely spliced structural protein encoding transcripts are held within the nucleus by cellular proteins that normally function in preventing the nuclear export of cellular pre-mRNA. Export of both unspliced and partially spliced mRNA is mediated by the viral protein Rev which is recruited, along with cellular cofactors, to the Rev Response Element (RRE) within the HIV-1 mRNA sequence (Malim et al., 1990; Fischer et al., 1994). The cellular hRIP protein is essential for correct Rev-mediated export of viral RNAs to the cytoplasm (Sanchez-Velar et al., 2004; Yu et al., 2005).
R-HSA-73943	Reversal of alkylation damage by DNA dioxygenases	DNA in cells is susceptible to different types of cytotoxic and mutagenic damage caused by alkylating agents. These genotoxic chemicals generate major lesions like 1-methyladenine, 3-methyladenine, 3-methylcytosine and O6-methylguanine in DNA. Cells have built in repair mechanisms against such toxic molecules. For example, 3-methyladeninie-DNA glycosylases excise some methylated bases while MGMT/hAGT protein transfers alkyl groups from others lesions onto cysteine residues. E.coli AlkB protein has a unique function wherein 1-methyladenine and 3-methylcytosine are demethylated by a combination of oxidative decarboxylation and hydroxylation activities. AlkB and its human orthologs, ALKBH2 (ABH2) and ALKBH3 (ABH3) belong to alpha-ketoglutarate deoxygenase family of enzymes that oxidize chemically inert compounds in the presence of alpha-ketoglutarate, oxygen and ferrous ions. As a byproduct of these chemical reactions, formaldehyde is released in the case of methylated lesions and acetaldehyde in the case 1-ethyladenine in DNA. CO2 and succinate are also released in an intermediate step not shown in the following illustration. Unlike other mechanisms which involve some kind of nuclease activities, this type of repair mechanism leaves the repaired bases intact by just removing the reactive alkyl groups that get bound to the bases thereby effecting accurate restoration of damaged DNA sequences (Trewick et al. 2002, Duncan et al. 2002, Sedgwick 2004).
R-HSA-162589	Reverse Transcription of HIV RNA	The RNA genome of HIV-1, like that of other retroviruses, is reverse-transcribed (Baltimore 1970; Temin and Mizutani 1970) into double-stranded DNA, which is then integrated into a host cell chromosome and transcribed to yield both viral mRNAs and viral genomic RNAs. HIV-1 reverse transcription takes place in the cytosol of a newly infected host cell and involves multiple steps of RNA synthesis and degradation of the RNA strand of RNA:DNA duplexes mediated by the HIV-1 RT protein, as well as two template switches, to yield a DNA duplex colinear with the viral genomic RNA but with additional Long Terminal Repeat (LTR) sequence motifs at both ends (Telesnitsky and Goff 1997; Jonckheere et al. 2000).<p>HIV-1 RT has two catalytic activities essential for transcription of a DNA duplex copy of the viral genomic RNA: a reverse transcriptase activity and an RNase H activity. The reverse transcriptase is primer dependent and can transcribe both RNA and DNA templates in a 5'-3' direction. The RNaseH acts on the RNA strand of RNA:DNA duplexes and can catalyze both endo- and exonucleolytic cleavage of such an RNA strand. RT is a heterodimer of 66 and 51 kD polypeptides, both generated by cleavage of the HIV-1 Pol gene product: p66 contains Pol amino acid residues 599-1158; p51 contains residues 599-1038. Both active sites of the HIV-1 RT enzyme are contained in the p66 polypeptide, the polymerase activity in its aminoterminal region, and the RNase in its carboxyterminus. The p51 subunit lacks an RNaseH domain, and while its polymerase domain is intact, its conformation in the p66:p51 heterodimer occludes the active site (Hughes et al. 1996; Jacobo-Molina et al. 1993; Kohlstaedt et al. 1992; Wang et al. 1994).<p>The process of reverse transcription is outlined in the figure below: viral genomic RNA and primer tRNA are shown in black, "minus" strand DNA is shown in red, and "plus" strand DNA is shown in blue.
R-HSA-1475029	Reversible hydration of carbon dioxide	Carbonic anhydrases reversibly catalyze the hydration of carbon dioxide and directly produce bicarbonate and protons, bypassing the formation of carbonic acid (reviewed in Lindskog 1997, Breton 2001, Esbaugh and Tufts 2006, Boron 2010, Gilmour 2010). Carbonic anhydrase deprotonates water to yield a zinc-hydroxyl group and a proton which is transferred to external buffer molecules via histidine or glutamate residues in carbonic anhydrase. The hydroxyl group reacts with carbon dioxide in the active site to yield bicarbonate. A water molecule displaces the bicarbonate and the reaction cycle begins again. There are currently 12 known active carbonic anhydrases in humans.
R-HSA-444411	Rhesus glycoproteins mediate ammonium transport.	The Rhesus (Rh) glycoproteins were originally described in human blood cells as potent immunogens. There are three Rh glycoproteins in humans; an erythroid-specific Rh-associated glycoprotein (RhAG) and two non-erythroid Rh glycoproteins, RhBG and RhCG. These proteins are related to ammonium (NH4+) transporters of yeast and bacteria (methylammonium and ammonium permease and ammonium transporter, MEP/Amt) (Nakhoul NL and Hamm LL, 2004; Planelles G, 2007).
R-HSA-194840	Rho GTPase cycle	The cycling of Rho GTPases is tightly controlled by three classes of protein. These are (1) guanine nucleotide dissociation inhibitors or GDIs, which maintain Rho proteins in an inactive state in the cytoplasm, (2) guanine nucleotide exchange factors or GEFs, which destabilize the interaction between Rho proteins and their bound nucleotide, the net result of which is the exchange of bound GDP for the more abundant GTP, and (3) GTPase Activating Proteins or GAPs, which stimulate the low intrinsic GTP hydrolysis activity of Rho family members, thus promoting their inactivation. GDIs, GEFs, and GAPs are themselves subject to tight regulation, and the overall level of Rho activity reflects the balance of their activities.<p>In their active GTP-bound state, Rho family members have the ability to interact with a large variety of so-called effector proteins. By changing the subcellular localization of effectors, by altering their enzymatic properties, or by directing the formation of specific effector complexes, members of the Rho family mediate their various effects.<p>This Rho GTPase cycle is diagrammed in the figure below. External or internal cues promote the release of Rho GTPases from the inhibitory complex (1) which allows them to associate with the plasma membrane (2) where they are activated by GEFs (3) and can signal to effector proteins. Then, GAPs inactivate the GTPases by accelerating the intrinsic GTPase activity, leading to the GDP bound form (4). Once again, the GDI molecules stabilize the inactive GDP bound form in the cytoplasm, waiting for further instructions (5). (Figure and text from Tcherkezian and Lamarche Vane, 2007).
R-HSA-195258	RHO GTPase Effectors	RHO GTPases regulate cell behaviour by activating a number of downstream effectors that regulate cytoskeletal organization, intracellular trafficking and transcription (reviewed by Sahai and Marshall 2002).<p>One of the best studied RHO GTPase effectors are protein kinases ROCK1 and ROCK2, which are activated by binding RHOA, RHOB or RHOC. ROCK1 and ROCK2 phosphorylate many proteins involved in the stabilization of actin filaments and generation of actin-myosin contractile force, such as LIM kinases and myosin regulatory light chains (MRLC) (Amano et al. 1996, Ishizaki et al. 1996, Leung et al. 1996, Ohashi et al. 2000, Sumi et al. 2001, Riento and Ridley 2003, Watanabe et al. 2007).<p>PAK1, PAK2 and PAK3, members of the p21-activated kinase family, are activated by binding to RHO GTPases RAC1 and CDC42 and subsequent autophosphorylation and are involved in cytoskeleton regulation (Manser et al. 1994, Manser et al. 1995, Zhang et al. 1998, Edwards et al. 1999, Lei et al. 2000, Parrini et al. 2002; reviewed by Daniels and Bokoch 1999, Szczepanowska 2009).<p>RHOA, RHOB, RHOC and RAC1 activate protein kinase C related kinases (PKNs) PKN1, PKN2 and PKN3 (Maesaki et al. 1999, Zong et al. 1999, Owen et al. 2003, Modha et al. 2008, Hutchinson et al. 2011, Hutchinson et al. 2013), bringing them in proximity to the PIP3-activated PDPK1 (PDK1) and thus enabling PDPK1-mediated phosphorylation of PKN1, PKN2 and PKN3 (Flynn et al. 2000, Torbett et al. 2003). PKNs play important roles in cytoskeleton organization (Hamaguchi et al. 2000), regulation of cell cycle (Misaki et al. 2001), receptor trafficking (Metzger et al. 2003) and apoptosis (Takahashi et al. 1998). PKN1 is also involved in the ligand-dependent transcriptional activation by the androgen receptor (Metzger et al. 2003, Metzger et al. 2005, Metzger et al. 2008).<p>Citron kinase (CIT) binds RHO GTPases RHOA, RHOB, RHOC and RAC1 (Madaule et al. 1995), but the mechanism of CIT activation by GTP-bound RHO GTPases has not been elucidated. CIT and RHOA are implicated to act together in Golgi apparatus organization through regulation of the actin cytoskeleton (Camera et al. 2003). CIT is also involved in the regulation of cytokinesis through its interaction with KIF14 (Gruneberg et al. 2006, Bassi et al. 2013, Watanabe et al. 2013).<p>RHOA, RHOG, RAC1 and CDC42 bind kinectin (KTN1), a kinesin anchor protein involved in kinesin-mediated vesicle motility (Vignal et al. 2001, Hotta et al. 1996). The effect of RHOG activity on cellular morphology, exhibited in the formation of microtubule-dependent cellular protrusions, depends both on RHOG interaction with KTN1, as well as on the kinesin activity (Vignal et al. 2001). RHOG and KTN1 also cooperate in microtubule-dependent lysosomal transport (Vignal et al. 2001).<p>IQGAP proteins IQGAP1, IQGAP2 and IQGAP3, bind RAC1 and CDC42 and stabilize them in their GTP-bound state (Kuroda et al. 1996, Swart-Mataraza et al. 2002, Wang et al. 2007). IQGAPs bind F-actin filaments and modulate cell shape and motility through regulation of G-actin/F-actin equilibrium (Brill et al. 1996, Fukata et al. 1997, Bashour et al. 1997, Wang et al. 2007, Pelikan-Conchaudron et al. 2011). Binding of IQGAPs to F-actin is inhibited by calmodulin (Bashour et al. 1997, Pelikan-Conchaudron et al. 2011). IQGAP1 is involved in the regulation of adherens junctions through its interaction with E-cadherin (CDH1) and catenins (CTTNB1 and CTTNA1) (Kuroda et al. 1998, Hage et al. 2009). IQGAP1 contributes to cell polarity and lamellipodia formation through its interaction with microtubules (Fukata et al. 2002, Suzuki and Takahashi 2008).<p>RHOQ (TC10) regulates the trafficking of CFTR (cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator) by binding to the Golgi-associated protein GOPC (also known as PIST, FIG and CAL). In the absence of RHOQ, GOPC bound to CFTR directs CFTR for lysosomal degradation, while GTP-bound RHOQ directs GOPC:CFTR complex to the plasma membrane, thereby rescuing CFTR (Neudauer et al. 2001, Cheng et al. 2005).<p>RAC1 and CDC42 activate WASP and WAVE proteins, members of the Wiskott-Aldrich Syndrome protein family. WASPs and WAVEs simultaneously interact with G-actin and the actin-related ARP2/3 complex, acting as nucleation promoting factors in actin polymerization (reviewed by Lane et al. 2014).<p>RHOA, RHOB, RHOC, RAC1 and CDC42 activate a subset of formin family members. Once activated, formins bind G-actin and the actin-bound profilins and accelerate actin polymerization, while some formins also interact with microtubules. Formin-mediated cytoskeletal reorganization plays important roles in cell motility, organelle trafficking and mitosis (reviewed by Kuhn and Geyer 2014).<p>Rhotekin (RTKN) and rhophilins (RHPN1 and RHPN2) are effectors of RHOA, RHOB and RHOC and have not been studied in detail. They regulate the organization of the actin cytoskeleton and are implicated in the establishment of cell polarity, cell motility and possibly endosome trafficking (Sudo et al. 2006, Watanabe et al. 1996, Fujita et al. 2000, Peck et al. 2002, Mircescu et al. 2002). Similar to formins (Miralles et al. 2003), cytoskeletal changes triggered by RTKN activation may lead to stimulation of SRF-mediated transcription (Reynaud et al. 2000).<p>RHO GTPases RAC1 and RAC2 are needed for activation of NADPH oxidase complexes 1, 2 and 3 (NOX1, NOX2 and NOX3), membrane associated enzymatic complexes that use NADPH as an electron donor to reduce oxygen and produce superoxide (O2-). Superoxide serves as a secondary messenger and also directly contributes to the microbicidal activity of neutrophils (Knaus et al. 1991, Roberts et al. 1999, Kim and Dinauer 2001, Jyoti et al. 2014, Cheng et al. 2006, Miyano et al. 2006, Ueyama et al. 2006).
R-HSA-5625900	RHO GTPases activate CIT	Citron kinase (CIT) or citron RHO-interacting kinase (CRIK) shares similarities with ROCK kinases. Like ROCK, it consists of a serine/threonine kinase domain, a coiled-coil region, a RHO-binding domain, a cysteine rich region and a plekstrin homology (PH) domain, but additionally features a proline-rich region and a PDZ-binding domain. A shorter splicing isoform of CIT, citron-N, is specifically expressed in the nervous system and lacks the kinase domain. Citron-N is a component of the post-synaptic density, where it binds to the PDZ domains of the scaffolding protein PDS-95/SAP90 (Zhang et al. 2006).<p>While the binding of CIT to RHO GTPases RHOA, RHOB, RHOC and RAC1 is well established (Madaule et al. 1995), the mechanism of CIT activation by GTP-bound RHO GTPases has not been elucidated. There are indications that CIT may be activated through autophosphorylation in the presence of active forms of RHO GTPases (Di Cunto et al. 1998). CIT appears to phosphorylate the myosin regulatory light chain (MRLC), the only substrate identified to date, on the same residues that are phosphorylated by ROCKs, but it has not been established yet how this relates to activation by RHO GTPases (Yamashiro et al. 2003). CIT and RHOA are implicated to act together in Golgi apparatus organization through regulation of the actin cytoskeleton (Camera et al. 2003). CIT is also involved in the regulation of cytokinesis through its interaction with KIF14 (Gruneberg et al. 2006, Bassi et al. 2013, Watanabe et al. 2013) and p27(Kip1) (Serres et al. 2012).
R-HSA-5663220	RHO GTPases Activate Formins	Formins are a family of proteins with 15 members in mammals, organized into 8 subfamilies. Formins are involved in the regulation of actin cytoskeleton. Many but not all formin family members are activated by RHO GTPases. Formins that serve as effectors of RHO GTPases belong to different formin subfamilies but they all share a structural similarity to Drosophila protein diaphanous and are hence named diaphanous-related formins (DRFs).<p>DRFs activated by RHO GTPases contain a GTPase binding domain (GBD) at their N-terminus, followed by formin homology domains 3, 1, and 2 (FH3, FH1, FH2) and a diaphanous autoregulatory domain (DAD) at the C-terminus. Most DRFs contain a dimerization domain (DD) and a coiled-coil region (CC) in between FH3 and FH1 domains (reviewed by Kuhn and Geyer 2014). RHO GTPase-activated DRFs are autoinhibited through the interaction between FH3 and DAD which is disrupted upon binding to an active RHO GTPase (Li and Higgs 2003, Lammers et al. 2005, Nezami et al. 2006). Since formins dimerize, it is not clear whether the FH3-DAD interaction is intra- or intermolecular. FH2 domain is responsible for binding to the F-actin and contributes to the formation of head-to-tail formin dimers (Xu et al. 2004). The proline-rich FH1 domain interacts with the actin-binding proteins profilins, thereby facilitating actin recruitment to formins and accelerating actin polymerization (Romero et al. 2004, Kovar et al. 2006).<p>Different formins are activated by different RHO GTPases in different cell contexts. FMNL1 (formin-like protein 1) is activated by binding to the RAC1:GTP and is involved in the formation of lamellipodia in macrophages (Yayoshi-Yamamoto et al. 2000) and is involved in the regulation of the Golgi complex structure (Colon-Franco et al. 2011). Activation of FMNL1 by CDC42:GTP contributes to the formation of the phagocytic cup (Seth et al. 2006). Activation of FMNL2 (formin-like protein 2) and FMNL3 (formin-like protein 3) by RHOC:GTP is involved in cancer cell motility and invasiveness (Kitzing et al. 2010, Vega et al. 2011). DIAPH1, activated by RHOA:GTP, promotes elongation of actin filaments and activation of SRF-mediated transcription which is inhibited by unpolymerized actin (Miralles et al. 2003). RHOF-mediated activation of DIAPH1 is implicated in formation of stress fibers (Fan et al. 2010). Activation of DIAPH1 and DIAPH3 by RHOB:GTP leads to actin coat formation around endosomes and regulates endosome motility and trafficking (Fernandez-Borja et al. 2005, Wallar et al. 2007). Endosome trafficking is also regulated by DIAPH2 transcription isoform 3 (DIAPH2-3) which, upon activation by RHOD:GTP, recruits SRC kinase to endosomes (Tominaga et al. 2000, Gasman et al. 2003). DIAPH2 transcription isoform 2 (DIAPH2-2) is involved in mitosis where, upon being activated by CDC42:GTP, it facilitates the capture of astral microtubules by kinetochores (Yasuda et al. 2004, Cheng et al. 2011). DIAPH2 is implicated in ovarian maintenance and premature ovarian failure (Bione et al. 1998). DAAM1, activated by RHOA:GTP, is involved in linking WNT signaling to cytoskeleton reorganization (Habas et al. 2001). 
R-HSA-5626467	RHO GTPases activate IQGAPs	IQGAPs constitute a family of scaffolding proteins characterized by a calponin homology (CH) domain, a polyproline binding region (WW domain), a tandem of four IQ (isoleucine and glutamine-rich) repeats and a RAS GTPase-activating protein-related domain (GRD). Three IQGAPs have been identified in human, IQGAP1, IQGAP2 and IQGAP3. The best characterized is IQGAP1 and over 90 proteins have been reported to bind to it. IQGAPs integrate multiple signaling pathways and coordinate a large variety of cellular activities (White et al. 2012). IQGAP proteins IQGAP1, IQGAP2 and IQGAP3, bind activated RHO GTPases RAC1 and CDC42 via their GRD and stabilize them in their GTP-bound state (Kuroda et al. 1996, Swart-Mataraza et al. 2002, Wang et al. 2007). IQGAPs bind F-actin filaments via the CH domain and modulate cell shape and motility through regulation of G-actin/F-actin equilibrium (Brill et al. 1996, Fukata et al. 1997, Bashour et al. 1997, Wang et al. 2007, Pelikan-Conchaudron et al. 2011). Binding of IQGAPs to F-actin is inhibited by calmodulin binding to the IQ repeats (Bashour et al. 1997, Pelikan-Conchaudron et al. 2011). Based on IQGAP1 studies, IQGAPs presumably function as homodimers (Bashour et al. 1997).<p>IQGAP1 is involved in the regulation of adherens junctions through its interaction with E-cadherin (CDH1) and catenins (CTTNB1 and CTTNA1) (Kuroda et al. 1998, Hage et al. 2009). IQGAP1 contributes to cell polarity and lamellipodia formation through its interaction with microtubules (Fukata et al. 2002, Suzuki and Takahashi 2008). 
R-HSA-5625970	RHO GTPases activate KTN1	GTP-bound active forms of RHO GTPases RHOA, RHOG, RAC1 and CDC42 bind kinectin (KTN1), a protein inserted in endoplasmic reticulum membranes that interacts with the cargo-binding site of kinesin and activates its microtubule-stimulated ATPase activity required for vesicle motility (Vignal et al. 2001, Hotta et al. 1996). The effect of RHOG activity on cellular morphology, exhibited in the formation of microtubule-dependent cellular protrusions, depends both on RHOG interaction with KTN1, as well as on the kinesin activity (Vignal et al. 2001). RHOG and KTN1 also cooperate in microtubule-dependent lysosomal transport (Vignal et al. 2001). The precise mechanism of kinectin-mediated Rho GTPase signaling cascade needs further elucidation, and only the first two steps, KTN1-activated RHO GTPase binding, and KTN1-kinesin-1 binding are annotated here.
R-HSA-5668599	RHO GTPases Activate NADPH Oxidases	NADPH oxidases (NOX) are membrane-associated enzymatic complexes that use NADPH as an electon donor to reduce oxygen and produce superoxide (O2-) that serves as a secondary messenger (Brown and Griendling 2009).<p>NOX2 complex consists of CYBB (NOX2), CYBA (p22phox), NCF1 (p47phox), NCF2 (p67phox) and NCF4 (p40ohox). RAC1:GTP binds NOX2 complex in response to VEGF signaling by directly interracting with CYBB and NCF2, leading to enhancement of VEGF-signaling through VEGF receptor VEGFR2, which plays a role in angiogenesis (Ushio-Fukai et al. 2002, Bedard and Krause 2007). RAC2:GTP can also activate the NOX2 complex by binding to CYBB and NCF2, leading to production of superoxide in phagosomes of neutrophils which is necessary fo the microbicidal activity of neutrophils (Knaus et al. 1991, Roberts et al. 1999, Kim and Dinauer 2001, Jyoti et al. 2014).<p>NOX1 complex (composed of NOX1, NOXA1, NOXO1 and CYBA) and NOX3 complex (composed of NOX3, CYBA, NCF1 amd NCF2 or NOXA1) can also be activated by binding to RAC1:GTP to produce superoxide (Cheng et al. 2006, Miyano et al. 2006, Ueyama et al. 2006).
R-HSA-5627123	RHO GTPases activate PAKs	The PAKs (p21-activated kinases) are a family of serine/threonine kinases mainly implicated in cytoskeletal rearrangements. All PAKs share a conserved catalytic domain located at the carboxyl terminus and a highly conserved motif in the amino terminus known as p21-binding domain (PBD) or Cdc42/Rac interactive binding (CRIB) domain. There are six mammalian PAKs that can be divided into two classes: class I (or conventional) PAKs (PAK1-3) and class II PAKs (PAK4-6). Conventional PAKs are important regulators of cytoskeletal dynamics and cell motility and are additionally implicated in transcription through MAPK (mitogen-activated protein kinase) cascades, death and survival signaling and cell cycle progression (Chan and Manser 2012).<p>PAK1, PAK2 and PAK3 are direct effectors of RAC1 and CDC42 GTPases. RAC1 and CDC42 bind to the CRIB domain. This binding induces a conformational change that disrupts inactive PAK homodimers and relieves autoinhibition of the catalytic carboxyl terminal domain (Manser et al. 1994, Manser et al. 1995, Zhang et al. 1998, Lei et al. 2000, Parrini et al. 2002; reviewed by Daniels and Bokoch 1999, Szczepanowska 2009). Autophosphorylation of a conserved threonine residue in the catalytic domain of PAKs (T423 in PAK1, T402 in PAK2 and T436 in PAK3) is necessary for the kinase activity of PAK1, PAK2 and PAK3. Autophosphorylation of PAK1 serine residue S144, PAK2 serine residue S141, and PAK3 serine residue S154 disrupts association of PAKs with RAC1 or CDC42 and enhances kinase activity (Lei et al. 2000, Chong et al. 2001, Parrini et al. 2002, Jung and Traugh 2005, Wang et al. 2011). LIMK1 is one of the downstream targets of PAK1 and is activated through PAK1-mediated phosphorylation of the threonine residue T508 within its activation loop (Edwards et al. 1999). Further targets are the myosin regulatory light chain (MRLC), myosin light chain kinase (MLCK), filamin, cortactin, p41Arc (a subunit of the Arp2/3 complex), caldesmon, paxillin and RhoGDI, to mention a few (Szczepanowska 2009).<p>Class II PAKs also have a CRIB domain, but lack a defined autoinhibitory domain and proline-rich regions. They do not require GTPases for their kinase activity, but their interaction with RAC or CDC42 affects their subcellular localization. Only conventional PAKs will be annotated here. 
R-HSA-5625740	RHO GTPases activate PKNs	Protein kinases N (PKN), also known as protein kinase C-related kinases (PKR) feature a C-terminal serine/threonine kinase domain and three RHO-binding motifs at the N-terminus. RHO GTPases RHOA, RHOB, RHOC and RAC1 bind PKN1, PKN2 and PKN3 (Maesaki et al. 1999, Zhong et al. 1999, Owen et al. 2003, Modha et al. 2008, Hutchinson et al. 2011, Hutchinson et al. 2013), bringing them in proximity to the PIP3-activated co-activator PDPK1 (PDK1) (Flynn et al. 2000, Torbett et al. 2003). PDPK1 phosphorylates PKNs on a highly conserved threonine residue in the kinase activation loop, which is a prerequisite for PKN activation. Phosphorylation of other residues might also be involved in activation (Flynn et al. 2000, Torbett et al. 2003, Dettori et al. 2009). PKNs are activated by fatty acids like arachidonic acid and phospholipids in vitro, but the in vivo significance of this activation remains unclear (Palmer et al. 1995, Yoshinaga et al. 1999).<p>PKNs play important roles in diverse functions, including regulation of cell cycle, receptor trafficking, vesicle transport and apoptosis. PKN is also involved in the ligand-dependent transcriptional activation by the androgen receptor. More than 20 proteins and several peptides have been shown to be phosphorylated by PKN1 and PKN2, including CPI-17 (Hamaguchi et al. 2000), alpha-actinin (Mukai et al. 1997), adducin (Collazos et al. 2011), CDC25C (Misaki et al. 2001), vimentin (Matsuzawa et al. 1997), TRAF1 (Kato et al. 2008), CLIP170 (Collazos et al. 2011) and EGFR (Collazos et al. 2011). There are no known substrates for PKN3 (Collazos et al. 2011).
R-HSA-5666185	RHO GTPases Activate Rhotekin and Rhophilins	Rhotekin (RTKN) is a protein with an N-terminally located RHO GTPase binding domain, that shares a limited sequence homology with PKNs and rhophilins. RTKN binds to GTP-bound RHOA, RHOB and RHOC and can inhibit their GTPase activity (Reid et al. 1996, Fu et al. 2000), which can be corroborated by protein kinase D-mediated phosphorylation of RTKN (Pusapati et al. 2012). RTKN is implicated in the establishment of cell polarity (Sudo et al. 2006), septin organization (Ito et al. 2005, Sudo et al. 2007) and stimulation of SRF-mediated transcription (Reynaud et al. 2000). RTKN can have an anti-apoptotic effect that depends on the activation of NFKB (NF-kappaB) (Liu et al. 2004). RTKN2 (rhotekin-2) is another rhotekin exclusively expressed in lymphocytes (Collier et al. 2004). The function and the mechanism of action of RTKN2 are unknown.<p>Rhophillins include two family members - rhophilin-1 (RHNP1) and rhophilin-2 (RHPN2) with ~75% sequence identity. A RHO GTPase binding domain is located at the N-terminus of rhophilins, followed by a BRO1 domain (characteristic of proteins involved in protein kinase C signaling) and a C-terminal PDZ domain. RHOA:GTP binds both RHPN1 and RHPN2 and these interactions may be involved in organization of the actin cytoskeleton and/or cell motility (Watanabe et al. 1996, Fujita et al. 2000, Peck et al. 2002). RHOB:GTP recruits RHPN2 to endosomes which may be involved in the function of thyroid cells (Mircescu et al. 2002).
R-HSA-5627117	RHO GTPases Activate ROCKs	RHO associated, coiled-coil containing protein kinases ROCK1 and ROCK2 consist of a serine/threonine kinase domain, a coiled-coil region, a RHO-binding domain and a plekstrin homology (PH) domain interspersed with a cysteine-rich region. The PH domain inhibits the kinase activity of ROCKs by an intramolecular fold. ROCKs are activated by binding of the GTP-bound RHO GTPases RHOA, RHOB and RHOC to the RHO binding domain of ROCKs (Ishizaki et al. 1996, Leung et al. 1996), which disrupts the autoinhibitory fold. Once activated, ROCK1 and ROCK2 phosphorylate target proteins, many of which are involved in the stabilization of actin filaments and generation of actin-myosin contractile force. ROCKs phosphorylate LIM kinases LIMK1 and LIMK2, enabling LIMKs to phosphorylate cofilin, an actin depolymerizing factor, and thereby regulate the reorganization of the actin cytoskeleton (Ohashi et al. 2000, Sumi et al. 2001). ROCKs phosphorylate MRLC (myosin regulatory light chain), which stimulates the activity of non-muscle myosin II (NMM2), an actin-based motor protein involved in cell migration, polarity formation and cytokinesis (Amano et al. 1996, Riento and Ridley 2003, Watanabe et al. 2007, Amano et al. 2010). ROCKs also phosphorylate the myosin phosphatase targeting subunit (MYPT1) of MLC phosphatase, inhibiting the phosphatase activity and preventing dephosphorylation of MRLC. This pathway acts synergistically with phosphorylation of MRLC by ROCKs towards stimulation of non-muscle myosin II activity (Kimura et al. 1996, Amano et al. 2010). 
R-HSA-5663213	RHO GTPases Activate WASPs and WAVEs	WASP and WAVE proteins belong to the Wiskott-Aldrich Syndrome protein family, with recessive mutations in the founding member WASP being responsible for the X-linked recessive immunodeficieny known as the Wiskott-Aldrich Syndrome. WASP proteins include WASP and WASL (N-WASP). WAVE proteins include WASF1 (WAVE1), WASF2 (WAVE2) and WASF3 (WAVE3). WASPs and WAVEs contain a VCA domain (consisting of WH2 and CA subdomains) at the C-terminus, responsible for binding to G-actin (WH2 subdomain) and the actin-associated ARP2/3 complex (CA subdomain). WASPs contain a WH1 (WASP homology 1) domain at the N-terminus, responsible for binding to WIPs (WASP-interacting proteins). A RHO GTPase binding domain (GBD) is located in the N-terminal half of WASPs and C-terminally located in WAVEs. RHO GTPases activate WASPs by disrupting the autoinhibitory interaction between the GBD and VCA domains, which allows WASPs to bind actin and the ARP2/3 complex and act as nucleation promoting factors in actin polymerization. WAVEs have the WAVE/SCAR homology domain (WHD/SHD) at the N-terminus, which binds ABI, NCKAP1, CYFIP2 and BRK1 to form the WAVE regulatory complex (WRC). Binding of the RAC1:GTP to the GBD of WAVEs most likely induces a conformational change in the WRC that allows activating phosphorylation of WAVEs by ABL1, thus enabling them to function as nucleation promoting factors in actin polymerization through binding G-actin and the ARP2/3 complex (Reviewed by Lane et al. 2014).
R-HSA-5627083	RHO GTPases regulate CFTR trafficking	Activated RHO GTPase RHOQ (TC10) regulates the trafficking of CFTR (cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator) by binding to GOPC (Golgi-associated and PDZ and coiled-coil motif-containing protein) also known as PIST, FIG or CAL. GOPC is a Golgi resident protein that binds several membrane proteins, thereby modulating their expression. In the absence of RHOQ, GOPC bound to CFTR directs CFTR for lysosomal degradation, while GTP-bound RHOQ directs GOPC:CFTR complex to the plasma membrane, thereby rescuing CFTR (Neudauer et al. 2001, Cheng et al. 2005).
R-HSA-72702	Ribosomal scanning and start codon recognition	The 80S ribosome bound to the mRNA moves along the mRNA molecule from its initial site to the initiation codon and forms a 48S complex, in which the initiation codon is base paired to the anticodon of the Met-tRNAi. Proper recognition of the AUG initiation codon depends on base pairing with the anticodon of the Met-tRNAi and requires eIF1, eIF1A, eIF2 and eIF5.
R-HSA-168928	RIG-I/MDA5 mediated induction of IFN-alpha/beta pathways	RIG-I-like helicases (RLHs) the retinoic acid inducible gene-I (RIG-I) and melanoma differentiation associated gene 5 (MDA5) are RNA helicases that recognize viral RNA present within the cytoplasm. Functionally RIG-I and MDA5 positively regulate the IFN genes in a similar fashion, however they differ in their response to different viral species. RIG-I is essential for detecting influenza virus, Sendai virus, VSV and Japanese encephalitis virus (JEV), whereas MDA5 is essential in sensing encephalomyocarditis virus (EMCV), Mengo virus and Theiler's virus, all of which belong to the picornavirus family. RIG-I and MDA5 signalling results in the activation of IKK epsilon and (TKK binding kinase 1) TBK1, two serine/threonine kinases that phosphorylate interferon regulatory factor 3 and 7 (IRF3 and IRF7). Upon phosphorylation, IRF3 and IRF7 translocate to the nucleus and subsequently induce interferon alpha (IFNA) and interferon beta (IFNB) gene transcription.
R-HSA-1810476	RIP-mediated NFkB activation via ZBP1	Overexpression of human or murine ZBP1 (DAI) in human embryonic kidney 293T cells (HEK293T) activated NF-kB-dependent promoter in a dose-dependent manner. Two RHIM-contaning kinases RIP1 and RIP3 are implicated in ZBP1-induced NFkB activation (Rebsamen M et al 2009; Kaiser WJ et al 2008).
R-HSA-5213460	RIPK1-mediated regulated necrosis	Receptor-interacting kinase protein 1 (RIPK1) and RIPK3-dependent necrosis is called necroptosis or programmed necrosis. The kinase activities of RIPK1 and RIPK3 are essential for the necroptotic cell death in human, mouse cell lines and genetic mice models (Cho YS et al. 2009; He S et al. 2009, 2011; Zhang DW et al. 2009; McQuade T et al. 2013; Newton et al. 2014). The initiation of necroptosis can be stimulated by the same death ligands that activate apoptosis, such as tumor necrosis factor (TNF) alpha, Fas ligand (FasL), and TRAIL (TNF-related apoptosis-inducing ligand) or toll like receptors 3 and 4 ligands (Holler N et al. 2000; He S et al. 2009; Feoktistova M et al. 2011; Voigt S et al. 2014). In contrast to apoptosis, necroptosis represents a form of cell death that is optimally induced when caspases are inhibited (Holler N et al. 2000; Hopkins?Donaldson S et al. 2000; Sawai H 2014). Specific inhibitors of caspase-independent necrosis, necrostatins, have recently been identified (Degterev A et al. 2005, 2008). Necrostatins have been shown to inhibit the kinase activity of RIPK1 (Degterev A et al. 2008). Importantly, cell death of apoptotic morphology can be shifted to a necrotic phenotype when caspase 8 activity is compromised, otherwise active caspase 8 blocks necroptosis by the proteolytic cleavage of RIPK1 and RIPK3 (Kalai M et al. 2002; Degterev A et al. 2008; Lin Y et al. 1999; Feng S et al. 2007). When caspase activity is inhibited under certain pathophysiological conditions or by pharmacological agents, deubiquitinated RIPK1 is engaged in physical and functional interactions with its homolog RIPK3 leading to formation of necrosome, a necroptosis-inducing complex consisting of RIPK1 and RIPK3 (Sawai H 2013; Moquin DM et al. 2013; Kalai M et al. 2002; Cho YS et al. 2009, He S et al. 2009, Zhang DW et al. 2009). Within the necrosome RIPK1 and RIPK3 bind to each other through their RIP homotypic interaction motif (RHIM) domains. The RHIMs can facilitate RIPK1:RIPK3 oligomerization, allowing them to form amyloid?like fibrillar structures (Li J et al. 2012). RIPK3 in turn interacts with mixed lineage kinase domain?like protein (MLKL) (Sun L et al. 2012; Zhao J et al. 2012). The complex of RIPK1:RIPK3:MLKL is crucial for an execution phase of necroptosis which is strictly dependent on RIPK3-mediated phosphorylation of MLKL followed by MLKL oligomerization and translocation to membrane surfaces (Sun L et al. 2012; Wang H et al. 2014). Immunoblot analysis of cell fractions obtained by differential centrifugation of human colorectal adenocarcinoma (HT29) whole cell extracts suggests that upon necroptosis RIPK1:RIPK3:MLKL complexes shift to the plasma membrane and membranous organelles such as mitochondria, lysosome, endosome and ER (Wang H et al. 2014). These findings are supported by immunofluorescent imaging of subcellular distribution of necrosome components expressed in human cells (Wang H et al. 2014; Cai Z et al. 2014). The mechanisms of necroptosis regulation and execution downstream of MLKL remain elusive. MLKL has been proposed to induce necrosis execution in human cells (shown for HeLA and HT29 cell lines) by binding and activating phosphoglycerate mutase 5 (PGAM5) resulting in the induction of mitochondrial fission (Wang Z et al 2012). However, other studies showed that PGAM5-mediated mitochondrial fragmentation was dispensable for RIP?mediated necrosis in mouse cells (Murphy et al. 2013, Remijsen Q et al. 2014; Moujalled DM et al. 2014). Moreover, mitochondria-depleted 3T3 mouse embryo fibroblast cells were found to undergo necroptosis, suggesting that mitochondria axis may not be required for this process (Tait SW et al. 2013). Finally, RIPK3-activated MLKL has been also reported to translocate to lipid rafts of the plasma membrane where it facilitate cell death through membrane permeabilization (Cai Z et al. 2014; Dondelinger Y et al. 2014).<p>The Reactome module describes MLKL-mediated necroptotic events on the plasma membrane.
R-HSA-3214858	RMTs methylate histone arginines	Arginine methylation is a common post-translational modification; around 2% of arginine residues are methylated in rat liver nuclei (Boffa et al. 1977). Arginine can be methylated in 3 different ways: monomethylarginine (MMA); NG,NG-asymmetric dimethylarginine (ADMA) and NG,N'G-symmetric dimethylarginine (SDMA). The formation of MMA, ADMA and SDMA in mammalian cells is carried out by members of a family of nine protein arginine methyltransferases (PRMTs) (Bedford & Clarke 2009). <br><br>Type I, II and III PRMTs generate MMA on one of the two terminal guanidino nitrogen atoms. Subsequent generation of asymmetric dimethylarginine (ADMA) is catalysed by the type I enzymes PRMT1, PRMT2, PRMT3, co-activator-associated arginine methyltransferase 1 (CARM1), PRMT6 and PRMT8. Production of symmetric dimethylarginine (SDMA) is catalysed by the type II enzymes PRMT5 and PRMT7. On certain substrates, PRMT7 also functions as a type III enzyme, generating MMA only. PRMT9 activity has not been characterized. No known enzyme is capable of both ADMA and SDMA modifications. Arginine methylation is regarded as highly stable; no arginine demethylases are known (Yang & Bedford 2013). <br><br>Most PRMTs methylate glycine- and arginine-rich (GAR) motifs in their substrates (Boffa et al. 1977). CARM1 methylates a proline-, glycine- and methionine-rich (PGM) motif (Cheng et al. 2007). PRMT5 can dimethylate arginine residues in GAR and PGM motifs (Cheng et al. 2007, Branscombe et al. 2001). <br><br>PRMTs are widely expressed and are constitutively active as purified recombinant proteins. However, PRMT activity can be regulated through PTMs, association with regulatory proteins, subcellular compartmentalization and factors that affect enzyme-substrate interactions. The target sites of PRMTs are influenced by the presence of other PTMs on their substrates. The best characterized examples of this are for histones. Histone H3 lysine-19 acetylation (H3K18ac) primes the histone tail for asymmetric dimethylation at arginine-18 (H3R17me2a) by CARM1 (An et al. 2003, Daujat et al. 2002, Yue et al. 2007). H3 lysine-10 acetylation (H3K9ac) blocks arginine-9 symmetric dimethylation (H3R8me2s) by PRMT5 (Pal et al. 2004). H4R3me2a catalyzed by PRMT1 favours subsequent acetylation of the histone H4 tail (Huang et al. 2005). At the same time histone H4 lysine-5 acetylation (H4K5ac) makes the H4R3 motif a better substrate for PRMT5 compared with PRMT1, thereby moving the balance from an activating ADMA mark to a suppressive SDMA mark at the H4R3 motif (Feng et al. 2011). Finally methylation of Histone H3 on arginine-3 (H3R2me2a) by PRMT6 blocks methylation of H3 lysine-5 by the MLL complex (H3K4me3), and vice versa, methylation of H3K4me3 prevents H3R2me2a methylation (Guccione et al. 2007, Kirmizis et al. 2007, Hyllus et al. 2007). N.B. The coordinates of post-translational modifications represented and described here follow UniProt standard practice whereby coordinates refer to the translated protein before any further processing. Histone literature typically refers to coordinates of the protein after the initiating methionine has been removed. Therefore the coordinates of post-translated residues in the Reactome database and described here are frequently +1 when compared with the literature. 
R-HSA-77075	RNA Pol II CTD phosphorylation and interaction with CE	To facilitate co-transcriptional capping, and thereby restrict the cap structure to RNAs made by RNA polymerase II, the capping enzymes bind directly to the RNA polymerase II. The C-terminal domain of the largest Pol II subunit contains several phosphorylation sites on its heptapeptide repeats. The capping enzyme guanylyltransferase and the methyltransferase bind specifically to CTD phosphorylated at Serine 5 within the CTD. Kinase subunit of TFIIH, Cdk7, catalyzes this phosphorylation event that occurs near the promoter. In addition, it has been shown that binding of capping enzyme to the Serine-5 phosphorylated CTD stimulates guanylyltransferase activity in vitro.
R-HSA-167160	RNA Pol II CTD phosphorylation and interaction with CE	To facilitate co-transcriptional capping, and thereby restrict the cap structure to RNAs made by RNA polymerase II, the capping enzymes bind directly to the RNA polymerase II. The C-terminal domain of the largest Pol II subunit contains several phosphorylation sites on its heptapeptide repeats. The capping enzyme guanylyltransferase and the methyltransferase bind specifically to CTD phosphorylated at Serine 5 within the CTD. Kinase subunit of TFIIH, Cdk7, catalyzes this phosphorylation event that occurs near the promoter. In addition, it has been shown that binding of capping enzyme to the Serine-5 phosphorylated CTD stimulates guanylyltransferase activity in vitro.
R-HSA-73854	RNA Polymerase I Promoter Clearance	Promoter clearance is one of the rate-limiting steps in Polymerase I transcription. This step is composed of three phases, promoter opening, transcription initiation and promoter escape.
R-HSA-73772	RNA Polymerase I Promoter Escape	As the active RNA Polymerase I complex leaves the promoter Rrn3 dissociates from the complex. RNA polymerase I Promoter Clearance is complete and Chain Elongation begins.
R-HSA-73728	RNA Polymerase I Promoter Opening	The activity of the upstream binding factor (UBF-1) plays an important role in the regulation of rRNA synthesis. Studies reveal that phosphorylation of UBF-1 is required for its interaction with the RNA polymerase I complex, suggesting that phosphorylation of UBF-1 bound to the rDNA promoter during promoter opening modulates the assembly of the transcription initiation complex.
R-HSA-73864	RNA Polymerase I Transcription	The rRNA genes are transcribed by RNA polymerase I, one of three eukaryotic nuclear RNA polymerases. The polymerase is a multisubunit complex, composed of two large subunits (the most conserved portions include the catalytic site that shares similarity with other eukaryotic and bacterial multisubunit RNA polymerases) and a number of smaller subunits. Under a number of experimental conditions the core is competent to mediate ribonucleic acid synthesis, in vivo however, it requires additional factors to select the appropriate template. In humans the RNA transcript (45S) is approximately 13,000 nucleotides long. Before leaving the nucleus as assembled ribosomal particles, the 45S rRNA is cleaved to give one copy each of the 28S rRNA, the 18S rRNA, and the 5.8S rRNA. Equal quantities of the three rRNAs are produced by initially transcribing them as one transcript.
R-HSA-73762	RNA Polymerase I Transcription Initiation	During initiation the double-stranded DNA must be melted and transcription begins. SL1 forms and interacts with UBF-1 and the rDNA promoter. It is this platform that will recruit active RNA polymerase I to the SL1:phosphorlated UBF-1:rDNA promoter complex.<p>Mammalian rRNA genes are preceded by a terminator element that is recognized by the SL1 complex. This SL1 modulated acetylation of the basal Pol I transcription machinery has functional consequences suggesting that the reversible acetylation may be one way to regulate rDNA transcription.
R-HSA-73863	RNA Polymerase I Transcription Termination	Termination of transcription by RNA polymerase I is a 4 step process. Initially TTF-1 binds the template rDNA. This complex pauses polymerase I allowing PTRF to interact with the quaternary complex releasing both pre-rRNA and Pol I from the template and TTF-1.
R-HSA-504046	RNA Polymerase I, RNA Polymerase III, and Mitochondrial Transcription	Transcription by RNA Polymerase I, RNA Polymerase III and transcription from mitochondrial promoters.
R-HSA-167162	RNA Polymerase II HIV Promoter Escape	RNA Polymerase II promoter escape occurs after the first phosphodiester bond has been created.
R-HSA-73776	RNA Polymerase II Promoter Escape	RNA Polymerase II promoter escape occurs after the first phosphodiester bond has been created.
R-HSA-75955	RNA Polymerase II Transcription Elongation	The mechanisms governing the process of elongation during eukaryotic mRNA synthesis are being unraveled by recent studies. These studies have led to the expected discovery of a diverse collection of transcription factors that directly regulate the activities of RNA Polymerase II and unexpected discovery of roles for many elongation factors in other basic processes like DNA repair, recombination, etc. The transcription machinery and structural features of the major RNA polymerases are conserved across species. The genes active during elongation fall under different classes like, housekeeping, cell-cycle regulated, development and differentiation specific genes etc. The list of genes involved in elongation has been growing in recent times, and include: -TFIIS,DSIF, NELF, P-Tefb etc. that are involved in drug induced or sequence-dependent arrest - TFIIF, ELL, elongin, elongator etc. that are involved in increasing the catalytic rate of elongation by altering the Km and/or the Vmax of Pol II -FACT, Paf1 and other factors that are involved chromatin modification - DNA repair proteins, RNA processing and export factors, the 19S proteasome and a host of other factors like Spt5-Spt5, Paf1, and NELF complexes, FCP1P etc. (Arndt and Kane, 2003). Elongation also represents processive phase of transcription in which the activities of several mRNA processing factors are coupled to transcription through their binding to RNA polymerase (Pol II). One of the key events that enables this interaction is the differential phosphorylation of Pol II CTD. Phosphorylation pattern of CTD changes during transcription, most significantly at the beginning and during elongation process. TFIIH-dependent Ser5 phosphorylation is observed primarily at promoter regions while P-Tefb mediated Ser2 phosphorylation is seen mainly in the coding regions, during elongation. Experimental evidence suggests a dynamic association of RNA processing factors with differently modified forms of the polymerase during the transcription cycle. (Komarnitsky et al., 2000). [Komarnitsky et al 2000, Arndt & Kane 2003, Shilatifard et al 2003]
R-HSA-75953	RNA Polymerase II Transcription Initiation	Formation of the open complex exposes the template strand to the catalytic center of the RNA polymerase II enzyme. This facilitates formation of the first phosphodiester bond, which marks transcription initiation. As a result of this, the TFIIB basal transcription factor dissociates from the initiation complex.<p>The open transcription initiation complex is unstable and can revert to the closed state. Initiation at this stage requires continued (d)ATP-hydrolysis by TFIIH. Dinucleotide transcripts are not stably associated with the transcription complex. Upon dissociation they form abortive products. The transcription complex is also sensitive to inhibition by small oligo-nucleotides. <p>Dinucleotides complementary to position -1 and +1 in the template can also direct first phosphodiester bond formation. This reaction is independent on the basal transcription factors TFIIE and TFIIH and does not involve open complex formation. This reaction is sensitive to inhibition by single-stranded oligonucleotides.
R-HSA-73779	RNA Polymerase II Transcription Pre-Initiation And Promoter Opening	Formation of the pre-initiation complex
R-HSA-73856	RNA Polymerase II Transcription Termination	The detailed annotation of this section will be completed in the next release.
R-HSA-749476	RNA Polymerase III Abortive And Retractive Initiation	Abortive initiation, the repetitive formation of short oligonucleotides, is a ubiquitous feature of transcriptional initiation. This Pathway contains events inferred from events in Saccharomyces cerevisiae.
R-HSA-73780	RNA Polymerase III Chain Elongation	Pol III initiation complexes open the promoter spontaneously similar to the mechanism employed in archaeal and bacterial transcription. 
R-HSA-74158	RNA Polymerase III Transcription	RNA polymerase III is one of three types of nuclear RNA polymerases present in eucaryotic cells. About 10% of the total transcription in dividing cells can be attributed to its activity. It synthesizes an eclectic collection of catalytic or structural RNA molecules, some of which are involved in protein synthesis, pre-mRNA splicing, tRNA processing, and the control of RNA polymerase II elongation, whereas some others have still unknown functions. Like other RNA polymerases, RNA polymerase III cannot recognize its target promoters directly. Instead it is recruited to specific promoter sequences through the help of transcription factors. There are three basic types of RNA polymerase III promoters, called types 1, 2, and 3(Geiduschek and Kassavetis, 1992). Although in vivo, RNA polymerase III may be recruited to these promoters as part of a large complex (holo RNA polymerase III) containing the polymerase and its initiation factors (Wang et al., 1997), in vitro the reaction can be divided into several steps. First, the promoter elements are recognized by DNA binding factors, which then recruit a factor known as TFIIIB. TFIIIB itself then directly contacts RNA polymerase III. In human cells but not in <i>S. cerevisiae</i>, there are at least two versions of TFIIIB. One contains TBP, Bdp1, and Brf1 (Brf1-TFIIIB), and the other TBP, Bdp1, and Brf2 (Brf2-TFIIIB) (Schramm et al., 2000; Teichmann et al., 2000).
R-HSA-76046	RNA Polymerase III Transcription Initiation	There are three basic types of RNA polymerase III promoters. The three types of RNA polymerase III promoters are known as type 1, type 2, and type 3 promoters. Type 1 promoters are found in the 5S genes and consist of a gene-internal element called the internal control region (ICR), that is subdivided into A block, intermediate element, and C block (Bogenhagen, 1985; Sakonju et al., 1980). Type 2 promoters are found in tRNA genes, Adenovirus 2 VAI gene, and other genes (Galli et al., 1981; Sharp et al., 1981). These promoters consists of two gene-internal elements called the A and the B boxes. Type 3 promoters consist of a distal sequence element (DSE) that serves as an enhancer, a proximal sequence element (PSE), and a TATA box (Baer et al., 1989; Lobo and Hernandez, 1989). <p>Some promoters combine elements from type 2 and 3 promoters. For example, the S. cerevisiae U6 promoter, also shown in the figure, contains the TATA box typical of type 3 promoters and the A and B boxes typical of type 2 promoters. Moreover, in S. pombe, nearly all tRNA and 5S genes contain a TATA box in addition to gene-internal elements, and the TATA box is required for transcription.
R-HSA-76061	RNA Polymerase III Transcription Initiation From Type 1 Promoter	The type 1 promoters recruit TFIIIA, the founding member of the C2H2 zinc finger family of DNA-binding proteins (Engelke et al., 1980; Sakonju et al., 1981). The binding of TFIIIA then allows the binding of TFIIC (Lassar et al., 1983), a complex consisting of five subunits (which differs from the six subunits in S. cerevisiae) in human cells and S. pombe. Once the DNA/TFIIIA/TFIIIC complex is formed, Brf1-TFIIIB joins the complex and this in turn allows the recruitment of RNA polymerase III (Bieker et al., 1985; Setzer and Brown, 1985).
R-HSA-76066	RNA Polymerase III Transcription Initiation From Type 2 Promoter	The type 2 promoters can recruit TFIIIC without the help of TFIIIA because TFIIIC binds directly to the A and B boxes. As for the type 1 promoters, this then allows the binding of Brf1-TFIIIB and RNA polymerase III. Importantly, in the yeast system, once Brf1-TFIIIB has been recruited to type 1 or 2 promoters, TFIIIA and/or TFIIIC can be stripped from the DNA with high salt or heparin treatment. Brf1-TFIIIB remains bound to the DNA and is sufficient to direct multiple rounds of transcription .
R-HSA-76071	RNA Polymerase III Transcription Initiation From Type 3 Promoter	The metazoan-specific type 3 promoters, which are exemplified by the human U6 promoter, recruit a complex variously called the snRNA activating protein complex (SNAPc) (Sadowski et al., 1993), the PSE binding protein (PBP) (Waldschmidt et al., 1991), or the PSE transcription factor (PTF) (Murphy et al., 1992). The complex contains five types of subunits and binds to the PSE. Type 3 promoters also recruit Brf2-TFIIIB through a combination of protein-protein contacts with SNAPc and a direct association of the TBP component of Brf2-TFIIIB with the TATA box. This then allows RNA polymerase III to join the complex.<p>The down stream element (DSE) of type 3 promoters, which enhances transcription from the core promoter, almost invariably contains an octamer sequence and an SPH element (also called NONOCT element)(Cheung et al., 1993; Danzeiser et al., 1993; Kunkel et al., 1996; Myslinski et al., 1992). The octamer sequence recruits the POU domain protein Oct-1 (Herr et al., 1988; Sturm et al., 1988), and the SPH element recruits a zinc finger protein known as Staf or SPH binding factor (SBF), which has been cloned from humans (Myslinski et al., 1998; Rincon et al., 1998).
R-HSA-5340588	RNF mutants show enhanced WNT signaling and proliferation	RNF43 and related protein ZNRF3 are E3 ubiquitin ligases that negatively regulate WNT signaling by downregulating FZD receptors at the cell surface (Mukai et al, 2010; Hao et al, 2012). Frameshift loss-of-function mutations in RNF43 that enhance WNT signaling have been identified in pancreatic and colorectal cancers; the proliferation of these cells is dependent on the presence of secreted WNT, as their growth is abrogated by treatment of cells with the Porcupine inhibitor LGK974 (Koo et al, 2012; Jiang et al, 2013).
R-HSA-428890	Role of Abl in Robo-Slit signaling	Abl plays a dual role in the Robo pathway. As a key enzymatic component in the signaling pathway, Abl support repellent signaling (by recruiting the necessary actin binding proteins) and also feed back on the receptor (by down regulating through phosphorylation) to adjust the sensitivity of the pathway.<br>Abl cooperates with multiple effectors, including the actin binding protein Capulet (Capt) and Orbit/MAST/CLASP, suggesting that Abl simultaneously coordinates the dynamics of two major cytoskeletal systems to achieve growth cone repellent guidance.
R-HSA-2730905	Role of LAT2/NTAL/LAB on calcium mobilization	The lipid raft resident adaptor molecules LAT1 and Non-T cell activation linker (NTAL), also known as linker for activation of B cells (LAB)/LAT2 are known participants in the regulation of mast cell calcium responses. Both LAT and NTAL are expressed and phosphorylated following engagement of FCERI on mast cells. NTAL is functionally and topographically different from LAT. There is a considerable debate on the role of NTAL in mast cell. Depending on the circumstances, NTAL appears to have a dual role as positive and negative regulator of MC responses elicited via FCERI. Studies conducted in bone marrow-derived mast cells (BMMCs) of mice lacking NTAL displayed enhanced FCERI-mediated tyrosine phosphorylation of several substrates, calcium response, degranulation, and cytokine production. This indicated that NTAL negatively regulates FCERI-mediated degranulation. However, in mice lacking both LAT and NTAL showed severe block in FCERI-mediated signaling than BMMCs deficient in LAT alone, suggesting that NTAL also shares a redundant function with LAT to play a positive role (Draberova et al. 2007, Orr & McVicar. 2011, Zhu et al. 2004, Volna et al. 2004). The major steps in NTAL mediated Ca+2 influx involves NTAL--> GAB2--> PI3K
R-HSA-2029485	Role of phospholipids in phagocytosis	Phospholipases play an integral role in phagocytosis by generating essential second messengers. An early step in phagocytic signaling is the association of PIP2 and IP3 with the phagocytic cup. These are formed by the activity of phosphoinositol kinases and phospholipases. PI3K is has been shown to accumulate at phagocytic cups and converts PI (4,5)P2 to PI (3,4,5)P3. These phosphoinositides are capable of binding and increasing the activity of proteins that regulate the actin cytoskeleton. Phospholipases are lipid modifying enzymes that produce lipid mediators such as diacylglycerol (DAG), arachidonic acid (AA) and IP3. Phopsholipases PLA, PLC and PLD have been shown to be involved in antibody (IgG) mediated phagocytosis. The PLC product IP3 stimulates release of calcium from the endoplasmic reticulum. This Ca+2 concentration increase is greatest in the cytoplasm surrounding the phagocytic cup. Calcium is involved in the various stages of phagosome formation, including phagocytic ingestion and phagosome maturation.
R-HSA-418890	Role of second messengers in netrin-1 signaling	The levels of second messengers such as Ca+2, cAMP and cGMP may regulate the response of the growth cone to a particular cue. Netrin-1 as a guidance molecule depends on intracellular Ca+2 concentration, coactivation of PI3K and PLCgamma, and the type of response depends on the levels of cAMP. Netrin first stimulates its receptor DCC, resulting in the activation of the enzyme phospholipase C. This then produces the messenger molecules, inositol-1,4,5-trisphosphate (IP3) and DAG, which in turn causes the release of Ca+2 from intracellular stores. Ca+2 release from the stores then activates TRPC channels on the cell surface. DAG activates TRPC3 and TRPC6 in a direct, membrane delimited manner, and IP3 may activate TRPC channels by depleting the ER Ca+2 levels.
R-HSA-1368082	RORA activates gene expression	As inferred from mouse, RORA binds ROR elements (ROREs) in DNA and recruits the coactivators PPARGC1A (PGC-1alpha) and p300 (EP300, a histone acetylase) to activate transcription.
R-HSA-1222556	ROS production in response to bacteria	Alveolar macrophages normally develop their phagosome along the endolysosomal pathway. However, after having internalized <i>Mtb</i>, this development is arrested at an early stage and only includes acidification, nitric oxide and superoxide production, as well as the use of a few other proteins that can be gained from other endosomes which still can interact with the phagosome (Flannagan et al. 2009).
R-HSA-5659996	RPIA deficiency: failed conversion of R5P to RU5P	A mutation in ribose-5-phosphate isomerase (RPIA), an enzyme of the pentose phosphate pathway that normally mediates the reversible interconversion of ribose 5-phosphate and D-ribulose 5-phosphate, has been associated with a slowly progressive leukoencephalopathy (Wamelink et al. 2008).
R-HSA-6791461	RPIA deficiency: failed conversion of RU5P to R5P	A mutation in ribose-5-phosphate isomerase (RPIA), an enzyme of the pentose phosphate pathway that normally mediates the reversible interconversion of D-ribulose 5-phosphate and ribose 5-phosphate, has been associated with a slowly progressive leukoencephalopathy (Wamelink et al. 2008).
R-HSA-444257	RSK activation	Ribosomal S6 kinase has four isoforms in humans and each of the isoforms have sic conserved phosphorylation sites (S221, S363, S380,S749, T359,T573) out of which four are important for its activity (S221, S363, 380,T573).<br>Phosphorylation and activation of ribosomal S6 Kinase (RSK) occurs at the plasma membrane, cytoplasm and in the nucleus. Phosphorylation of RSK first occurs at residue T573 followed by S363 an S380 by activated MAPK/ERK . This form is then phosphorylated by PDK1, which is active in the plasm membrane by an autophosphorylation event.
R-HSA-69242	S Phase	DNA synthesis occurs in the S phase, or the synthesis phase, of the cell cycle. The cell duplicates its hereditary material, and two copies of the chromosome are formed. As DNA replication continues, the E type cyclins shared by the G1 and S phases, are destroyed and the levels of the mitotic cyclins rise.
R-HSA-5358747	S33 mutants of beta-catenin aren't phosphorylated	S33 mutations of beta-catenin interfere with GSK3 phosphorylation and result in stabilization and nuclear localization of the protein and enhanced WNT signaling (Groen et al, 2008; Nhieu et al, 1999; Clements et al, 2002; reviewed in Polakis, 2000). S33 mutations have been identified in cancers of the central nervous system, liver, endometrium and stomach, among others (reviewed in Polakis, 2000).
R-HSA-5358749	S37 mutants of beta-catenin aren't phosphorylated	S37 mutations of beta-catenin interfere with GSK3 phosphorylation and stabilize the protein, resulting in enhanced WNT pathway signaling (Nhieu et al, 1999; Clements et al, 2002; reviewed in Polakis, 2000). S37 mutations have been identified in cancers of the brain, liver, ovary and large intestine, among others (reviewed in Polakis, 2000).
R-HSA-5358751	S45 mutants of beta-catenin aren't phosphorylated	S45 mutants of beta-catenin have been identified in colorectal and hepatocellular carcinomas, soft tissue cancer and Wilms Tumors, among others (reviewed in Polakis, 2000). These mutations abolish the CK1alpha phosphorylation site of beta-catenin which acts as a critical priming site for GSK3 phosphorylation of T41( and subsequently S37 and S33) thus preventing its ubiquitin-mediated degradation (Morin et al, 1997; Amit et al, 2002).
R-HSA-3000480	Scavenging by Class A Receptors	Class A scavenger receptors contain an intracellular domain, a transmembrane region, a coiled-coil domain, a collagenous domain, and the SR cysteine-rich domain (reviewed in Areschoug and Gordon 2009, Bowdish and Gordon 2009). The coiled coil domains interact to form trimers. The collagenous domain (Rohrer et al. 1990, Acton et al. 1993) and/or the SR cysteine-rich domain (Brannstrom et al. 2002) bind ligands and determine the specificity of the receptor.
R-HSA-3000471	Scavenging by Class B Receptors	Class B receptors have two transmembrane domains separated by an extracellular loop (reviewed in Adachi and Tsujimoto 2006, Areschoug and Gordon 2009).
R-HSA-3000484	Scavenging by Class F Receptors	SCARF1 (SREC-I) and SCARF2 (SREC-II) are transmembrane proteins that contain multiple extracellular EGF-like domains (Ishii et al. 2002, reviewed in Areschoug and Gordon 2009). SCARF2 may be involved in cell adhesion rather than ligand binding.
R-HSA-3000497	Scavenging by Class H Receptors	STAB1 (FEEL-1) and STAB2 (FEEL-2) are very large transmambrane proteins containing fasciclin domains, EGF-like domains, and hyaluronan-like domains (Politz et al. 2002, reviewed in Areschoug and Gordon 2009).
R-HSA-2168880	Scavenging of heme from plasma	Free heme is damaging to tissues as it intercalates into biologic membranes, perturbing lipid bilayers and promoting the conversion of low-density lipoprotein to cytotoxic oxidized products. Moreover, it represents a source of redox-active iron that, participating in the Fenton reaction, generates oxygen radicals (reviewed in Gutteridge 1989). Free heme in plasma is mainly generated from hemoglobin released by circulating erythrocytes in pathologic conditions associated with intravascular hemolysis. Free hemoglobin in plasma is scavenged by the extracellular protein haptoglobin. Haptoglobin is produced by the liver and secreted into the plasma. Haptoglobin binds dimers of hemoglobin subunits rather than the intact tetramer (reviewed in Nielsen et al. 2010, Levy et al. 2010, Ascenzi et al. 2005, Madsen et al. 2001). The resulting haptoglobin:hemoglobin complex is then bound by CD163, expressed on plasma membranes of monocytes and macrophages, and endocytosed. When the buffering capacity of plasma haptoglobin is overwhelmed, heme is released from methemoglobin and it is bound by albumin and then transferred to hemopexin (reviewed in Chiabrando et al. 2011, Nielsen et al. 2010, Tolosano et al. 2010, Ascenzi et al. 2005, Tolosano and Altruda 2002). Hemopexin is produced mainly in the liver. Once secreted into the plasma, hemopexin binds heme and the hemopexin:heme complex is then preferentially delivered to liver hepatocytes, bound by LRP1 (CD91) and endocytosed. 
R-HSA-187577	SCF(Skp2)-mediated degradation of p27/p21	During G1, the activity of cyclin-dependent kinases (CDKs) is kept in check by the CDK inhibitors (CKIs) p27 and p21, thereby preventing premature entry into S phase (see Guardavaccaro and Pagano, 2006). These two CKIs are degraded in late G1 phase by the ubiquitin pathway (Pagano et al., 1995; Bloom et al., 2003) involving the ubiquitin ligase SCF(Skp2) (Tsvetkov et al., 1999; Carrano et al., 1999; Sutterluty et al., 1999, Bornstein et al., 2003) and the cell-cycle regulatory protein Cks1 (Ganoth et al., 2001; Spruck et al 2001; Bornstein et al., 2003). Recognition of p27 by SCF(Skp2) and its subsequent ubiquitination is dependent upon Cyclin E/A:Cdk2- mediated phosphorylation at Thr 187 of p27 (Montagnoli et al., 1999). There is evidence that Cyclin A/B:Cdk1 complexes can also bind and phosphorylate p27 on Th187 (Nakayama et al., 2004). Degradation of polyubiquitinated p27 by the 26S proteasome promotes the activity of CDKs in driving cells into S phase. (Montagnoli et al., 1999; Tsvetkov et al., 1999, Carrano et al 1999). The mechanism of SCF(Skp2)-mediated degradation of p21 is similar to that of p27 in terms of its requirements for the presence of Cks1 and of Cdk2/cyclin E/A (Bornstein et al.,2003; Wang et al., 2005). In addition, as observed for p27, p21 phosphorylation at a specific site (Ser130) stimulates its ubiquitination. In contrast to p27, however, ubiquitination of p21 can take place in the absence of phosphorylation, although with less efficiency (Bornstein et al.,2003). SCF(Skp2)-mediated degradation of p27/p21 continues from late G1 through M-phase. During G0 and from early G1 to G1/S, Skp2 is degraded by the anaphase promoting complex/Cyclosome and its activator Cdh1 [APC/C(Cdh1)] (Bashir et al, 2004; Wei et al, 2004). The tight regulation of APC/C(Cdh1) activity ensures the timely elimination Skp2 and, thus, plays a critical role in controlling the G1/S transition. APC/C(Cdh1) becomes active in late M-phase by the association of unphosphorylated Cdh1 with the APC/C. APC/C(Cdh1) remains active until the G1/S phase at which time it interacts with the inhibitory protein, Emi1 (Hsu et al., 2002). Inhibition of APC/C(Cdh1) activity results in an accumulation of cyclins, which leads to the phosphorylation and consequently to a further inactivation of Cdh1 at G1/S (Lukas et al., 1999). Finally, to make the inactivation of APC/C(Cdh1) permanent, Cdh1 and its E2, namely Ubc10, are eliminated in an auto-ubiquitination event (Listovsky et al., 2004; Rape and Kirschner, 2004). At G1/S, Skp2 reaccumulates as Cdh1 is inactivated, thus allowing the ubiquitination of p21 and p27 and resulting in a further increase in CDK activity.
R-HSA-174113	SCF-beta-TrCP mediated degradation of Emi1	Emi1 destruction in early mitosis requires the SCF beta-TrCP ubiquitin ligase complex. Binding of beta-TrCP to Emi1 occurs in late prophase and requires phosphorylation at the DSGxxS consensus motif as well as Cdk mediated phosphorylation. A two-step mechanism has been proposed in which the phosphorylation of Emi1 by Cdc2 occurs after the G2-M transition followed soon after by binding of beta-TrCP to the DSGxxS phosphorylation sites. Emi1 is then poly-ubiquitinated and degraded by the 26S proteasome.
R-HSA-399954	Sema3A PAK dependent Axon repulsion	Activated Rac1 bound to plexin-A might modulate actin dynamics through the sequential phosphorylation and activation of PAK, LIMK1 and cofilin.
R-HSA-399955	SEMA3A-Plexin repulsion signaling by inhibiting Integrin adhesion	Sema3A, a prototypical semaphorin, acts as a chemorepellent or a chemoattractant for axons by activating a receptor complex comprising neuropilin-1 as the ligand-binding subunit and plexin-A1 as the signal-transducing subunit. Sema3A inhibits cell migration by inhibiting integrin ligand-binding activity.
R-HSA-400685	Sema4D in semaphorin signaling	Semaphorin 4D (Sema 4D/CD100) is an axon guidance molecule with two disulfide-linked 150-kDa subunits. SEMA4D is structurally defined by a conserved 500-amino acid extracellular domain with 16 cysteines (sema domain) and also an Ig-like domain C-terminal to the sema domain. Sema4D is expressed on the cell surface as a homodimer; cysteine 679 within the sema domain is required for this dimerization.<br>The main receptors for Sema4D are plexin-B1 and CD72. The activation of plexins by semaphorins initiates a variety of signaling processes that involve several small GTPases of the Ras and Rho families. Sema4D-Plexin-B1 interaction appears to mediate different and sometimes opposite effects depending on the cellular context. Plexin-B1 activation inhibits integrin-mediated cell attachment and cell migration through the activation of the R-RasGAP activity inherent to plexin-B1 or through the inhibition of RhoA. However, activation of plexin-B1 by Sema4D stimulates the migration of endothelial cells by mediating the activation of RhoA.
R-HSA-416572	Sema4D induced cell migration and growth-cone collapse	Sema4D-mediated attraction of endothelial cells requires Rho, but not R-Ras, signaling. Sema4D-mediated plexinB1 activation activates Rho and its downstream effector ROCK. ROCK then phosphorylates MLC to induce actomyosin stress fiber contraction and to direct the assembly of focal adhesion complexes and integrin-mediated adhesion.
R-HSA-416550	Sema4D mediated inhibition of cell attachment and migration	Repulsive Sema4D-Plexin-B1 signaling involves four GTPases, Rnd1, R-Ras, Rho and Rac1. Sema4D-Plexin-B1 binding promotes Rnd1-dependent activation of the plexin-B1 GAP domain and transient suppression of R-Ras activity. R-Ras inactivation promotes PI3K and Akt inactivation followed by GSK-3beta activation and CRMP2 inactivation. Plexin-B1 also transiently associates with and activates p190Rho-GAP, triggering a transient decrease in activated Rho.
R-HSA-373755	Semaphorin interactions	Semaphorins are a large family of cell surface and secreted guidance molecules divided into eight classes on the basis of their structures. They all have an N-terminal conserved sema domain. Semaphorins signal through multimeric receptor complexes that include other proteins such as plexins and neuropilins. 
R-HSA-2559582	Senescence-Associated Secretory Phenotype (SASP)	The culture medium of senescent cells in enriched in secreted proteins when compared with the culture medium of quiescent i.e. presenescent cells and these secreted proteins constitute the so-called senescence-associated secretory phenotype (SASP), also known as the senescence messaging secretome (SMS). SASP components include inflammatory and immune-modulatory cytokines (e.g. IL6 and IL8), growth factors (e.g. IGFBPs), shed cell surface molecules (e.g. TNF receptors) and survival factors. While the SASP exhibits a wide ranging profile, it is not significantly affected by the type of senescence trigger (oncogenic signalling, oxidative stress or DNA damage) or the cell type (epithelial vs. mesenchymal) (Coppe et al. 2008). However, as both oxidative stress and oncogenic signaling induce DNA damage, the persistent DNA damage may be a deciding SASP initiator (Rodier et al. 2009). SASP components function in an autocrine manner, reinforcing the senescent phenotype (Kuilman et al. 2008, Acosta et al. 2008), and in the paracrine manner, where they may promote epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) and malignancy in the nearby premalignant or malignant cells (Coppe et al. 2008). Interleukin-1-alpha (IL1A), a minor SASP component whose transcription is stimulated by the AP-1 (FOS:JUN) complex (Bailly et al. 1996), can cause paracrine senescence through IL1 and inflammasome signaling (Acosta et al. 2013).<p>Here, transcriptional regulatory processes that mediate the SASP are annotated. DNA damage triggers ATM-mediated activation of TP53, resulting in the increased level of CDKN1A (p21). CDKN1A-mediated inhibition of CDK2 prevents phosphorylation and inactivation of the Cdh1:APC/C complex, allowing it to ubiquitinate and target for degradation EHMT1 and EHMT2 histone methyltransferases. As EHMT1 and EHMT2 methylate and silence the promoters of IL6 and IL8 genes, degradation of these methyltransferases relieves the inhibition of IL6 and IL8 transcription (Takahashi et al. 2012). In addition, oncogenic RAS signaling activates the CEBPB (C/EBP-beta) transcription factor (Nakajima et al. 1993, Lee et al. 2010), which binds promoters of IL6 and IL8 genes and stimulates their transcription (Kuilman et al. 2008, Lee et al. 2010). CEBPB also stimulates the transcription of CDKN2B (p15-INK4B), reinforcing the cell cycle arrest (Kuilman et al. 2008). CEBPB transcription factor has three isoforms, due to three alternative translation start sites. The CEBPB-1 isoform (C/EBP-beta-1) seems to be exclusively involved in growth arrest and senescence, while the CEBPB-2 (C/EBP-beta-2) isoform may promote cellular proliferation (Atwood and Sealy 2010 and 2011). IL6 signaling stimulates the transcription of CEBPB (Niehof et al. 2001), creating a positive feedback loop (Kuilman et al. 2009, Lee et al. 2010). NF-kappa-B transcription factor is also activated in senescence (Chien et al. 2011) through IL1 signaling (Jimi et al. 1996, Hartupee et al. 2008, Orjalo et al. 2009). NF-kappa-B binds IL6 and IL8 promoters and cooperates with CEBPB transcription factor in the induction of IL6 and IL8 transcription (Matsusaka et al. 1993, Acosta et al. 2008). Besides IL6 and IL8, their receptors are also upregulated in senescence (Kuilman et al. 2008, Acosta et al. 2008) and IL6 and IL8 may be master regulators of the SASP.<p>IGFBP7 is also an SASP component that is upregulated in response to oncogenic RAS-RAF-MAPK signaling and oxidative stress, as its transcription is directly stimulated by the AP-1 (JUN:FOS) transcription factor. IGFBP7 negatively regulates RAS-RAF (BRAF)-MAPK signaling and is important for the establishment of senescence in melanocytes (Wajapeyee et al. 2008).<p>Please refer to Young and Narita 2009 for a recent review.
R-HSA-5693548	Sensing of DNA Double Strand Breaks	Detection of DNA double-strand breaks (DSBs) involves sensor proteins of the MRN complex, composed of MRE11A, RAD50 and NBN (NBS1). Binding of the MRN complex to DNA DSBs activates ATM-dependent DNA damage signaling cascade, by promoting KAT5 (Tip60) mediated acetylation of ATM and subsequent ATM autophosphorylation. Activated ATM triggers and coordinates recruitment of repair proteins to DNA DSBs (Beamish et al. 2002, Thompson and Schild 2002, Bakkenist et al. 2003, Lee and Paull 2005, Sun et al. 2005, Sun et al. 2007, Ciccia and Elledge 2010).
R-HSA-2467813	Separation of Sister Chromatids	While sister chromatids resolve in prometaphase, separating along chromosomal arms, the cohesion of sister centromeres persists until anaphase. At the anaphase onset, the anaphase promoting complex/cyclosome (APC/C) ubiquitinates PTTG1 (securin), targeting it for degradation (Hagting et al. 2002). PTTG1 acts as an inhibitor of ESPL1 (known as separin i.e. separase). Hence, PTTG1 removal initiated by APC/C, enables ESPL1 to become catalytically active (Zou et al. 1999, Waizenegger et al. 2002). ESPL1 undergoes autoleavage (Waizenegger et al. 2002) and also cleaves RAD21 subunit of centromeric cohesin (Hauf et al. 2001). RAD21 cleavage promotes dissociation of cohesin complexes from sister centromeres, leading to separation of sister chromatids. Subsequent movement of sister chromatids to opposite poles of the mitotic spindle segregates replicated chromosomes to two daughter cells (Waizenegger et al. 2000, Hauf et al. 2001, Waizenegger et al. 2002).
R-HSA-977347	Serine biosynthesis	L-Serine is needed in human brain in large amounts as precursor to important biomolecules such as nucleotides, phospholipids and the neurotransmitters glycine and D-serine. The pathway for its synthesis starts with 3-phosphoglycerate and it later needs glutamate as an amination agent. Deficiencies in the participating enzymes lead to severe neurological symptoms that are treatable with serine if treatment starts early (de Koning & Klomp 2004).
R-HSA-209931	Serotonin and melatonin biosynthesis	Serotonin (5-HT) is a hormone and neurotransmitter used for regulatory purposes in animal CNS. In the human brain, serotonin is involved in many physiological functions such as sleep, pain, mood and is the precursor to melatonin, a hormone produced in the pineal gland.
R-HSA-380615	Serotonin clearance from the synaptic cleft	Serotonergic neurotransmission affects a wide range of behaviors, from food intake and reproductive activity, to sensory processing and motor activity, to cognition and emotion. One such key regulator is the serotonin transporter (5-HTT), which is observed to remove serotonin released into the synaptic cleft.
R-HSA-181429	Serotonin Neurotransmitter Release Cycle	Serotonin is synthesized in the serotonergic neurons in the central nervous system and the enterochrommaffin cells of the gastroinetstinal system. Serotonin is loaded into the clathrin sculpted monoamine transport vesicles. The vesicles are docked, primed and release after the change in the membrane potential that activates voltage gated calcium channels and the reponse by several proetins to the changes in intracellular Ca2+ increase leads to fusion of the vesicle and release of serotonin into the synapse.
R-HSA-390666	Serotonin receptors	Serotonin (5-HT) is a monoamine neurotransmitter that plays an important role as a modulator of anger, aggression, body temperature, mood, sleep, sexuality, appetite, metabolism, as well as stimulating vomiting. Several classes of drugs target the 5-HT system including some antidepressants, antipsychotics, anxiolytics, antiemetics and antimigraine drugs. The activity of 5-HT is modulated by 5-HT receptors, made up of seven families (5-HT1-7). All but 5-HT3 (ligand-gated ion channel) are GPCRs and these receptors bind different G proteins resulting in differing outcomes (Hoyer D et al, 1994; Kitson SL, 2007).
R-HSA-3282872	Severe congenital neutropenia type 4 (G6PC3)	Glucose-6-phosphatase 3 (G6PC3) associated with the endoplasmic reticulum membrane normally catalyzes the hydrolysis of glucose-6-phosphate to glucose and orthophosphate. In the body, this enzyme is ubiquitously expressed; mutations that inactivate it are associated with severe congenital neutropenia (but not with fasting hypoglycemia or lactic acidemia) (Boztug et al. 2009, 2012).
R-HSA-5654688	SHC-mediated cascade:FGFR1	The exact role of SHC1 in FGFR signaling remains unclear. Numerous studies have shown that the p46 and p52 isoforms of SHC1 are phosphorylated in response to FGF stimulation, but direct interaction with the receptor has not been demonstrated. Co-precipitation of p46 and p52 with the FGFR2 IIIc receptor has been reported, but this interaction is thought to be indirect, possibly mediated by SRC. Consistent with this, co-precipitation of SHC1 and FGFR1 IIIc is seen in mammalian cells expressing v-SRC. The p66 isoform of SHC1 has also been co-precipitated with FGFR3, but this occurs independently of receptor stimulation, and the p66 isoform not been shown to undergo FGF-dependent phosphorylation. SHC1 has been shown to associate with GRB2 and SOS1 in response to FGF stimulation, suggesting that the recruitment of SHC1 may contribute to activation of the MAPK cascade downstream of FGFR.
R-HSA-5654699	SHC-mediated cascade:FGFR2	The exact role of SHC1 in FGFR signaling remains unclear. Numerous studies have shown that the p46 and p52 isoforms of SHC1 are phosphorylated in response to FGF stimulation, but direct interaction with the receptor has not been demonstrated. Co-precipitation of p46 and p52 with the FGFR2 IIIc receptor has been reported, but this interaction is thought to be indirect, possibly mediated by SRC. Consistent with this, co-precipitation of SHC1 and FGFR1 IIIc is seen in mammalian cells expressing v-SRC. The p66 isoform of SHC1 has also been co-precipitated with FGFR3, but this occurs independently of receptor stimulation, and the p66 isoform not been shown to undergo FGF-dependent phosphorylation. SHC1 has been shown to associate with GRB2 and SOS1 in response to FGF stimulation, suggesting that the recruitment of SHC1 may contribute to activation of the MAPK cascade downstream of FGFR.
R-HSA-5654704	SHC-mediated cascade:FGFR3	The exact role of SHC1 in FGFR signaling remains unclear. Numerous studies have shown that the p46 and p52 isoforms of SHC1 are phosphorylated in response to FGF stimulation, but direct interaction with the receptor has not been demonstrated. Co-precipitation of p46 and p52 with the FGFR2 IIIc receptor has been reported, but this interaction is thought to be indirect, possibly mediated by SRC. Consistent with this, co-precipitation of SHC1 and FGFR1 IIIc is seen in mammalian cells expressing v-SRC. The p66 isoform of SHC1 has also been co-precipitated with FGFR3, but this occurs independently of receptor stimulation, and the p66 isoform not been shown to undergo FGF-dependent phosphorylation. SHC1 has been shown to associate with GRB2 and SOS1 in response to FGF stimulation, suggesting that the recruitment of SHC1 may contribute to activation of the MAPK cascade downstream of FGFR.
R-HSA-5654719	SHC-mediated cascade:FGFR4	The exact role of SHC1 in FGFR signaling remains unclear. Numerous studies have shown that the p46 and p52 isoforms of SHC1 are phosphorylated in response to FGF stimulation, but direct interaction with the receptor has not been demonstrated. Co-precipitation of p46 and p52 with the FGFR2 IIIc receptor has been reported, but this interaction is thought to be indirect, possibly mediated by SRC. Consistent with this, co-precipitation of SHC1 and FGFR1 IIIc is seen in mammalian cells expressing v-SRC. The p66 isoform of SHC1 has also been co-precipitated with FGFR3, but this occurs independently of receptor stimulation, and the p66 isoform not been shown to undergo FGF-dependent phosphorylation. SHC1 has been shown to associate with GRB2 and SOS1 in response to FGF stimulation, suggesting that the recruitment of SHC1 may contribute to activation of the MAPK cascade downstream of FGFR.
R-HSA-2428933	SHC-related events triggered by IGF1R	Phosphorylated IGF1R binds and phosphorylates SHC1 (reviewed in Pavelic et al. 2007, Chitnis et al. 2008, Maki et al. 2010, Parrella et al. 2010, Siddle et al. 2012). Phosphorylated SHC then binds GRB:SOS, which activates RAS-RAF-MAPK signaling.
R-HSA-180336	SHC1 events in EGFR signaling	GRB2 can bind EGFR directly or through another SH2-containing protein, SHC1. This association leads to RAS activation.
R-HSA-1250196	SHC1 events in ERBB2 signaling	All ERBB2 heterodimers, ERBB2:EGFR, ERBB2:ERBB3 and ERBB2:ERBB4, are able to activate RAF/MAP kinase cascade by recruiting SHC1 (Pinkas-Kramarski et al. 1996, Sepp-Lorenzino et al. 1996) to phosphorylated C-tail tyrosine residues in either EGFR (Y1148 and Y1173), ERBB2 (Y1196, Y1221, Y1222 and Y1248), ERBB3 (Y1328) or ERBB4 (Y1188 and Y1242 in JM-A CYT1 isoform, Y1178 and Y1232 in JM-B CYT1 isoform, Y1172 and Y1226 in JM-A CYT2 isoform). SHC1 recruitment is followed by phosphorylation (Segatto et al. 1993, Soler et al. 1994), and the phosphorylated SHC1 recruits GRB2:SOS1 complex (Xie et al. 1995), which leads to SOS1-mediated guanyl-nucleotide exchange on RAS (Xie et al. 1995) and downstream activation of RAF and MAP kinases.
R-HSA-1250347	SHC1 events in ERBB4 signaling	All splicing isoforms of ERBB4 possess two tyrosine residues in the C-tail that serve as docking sites for SHC1 (Kaushansky et al. 2008, Pinkas-Kramarski et al. 1996, Cohen et al. 1996). Once bound to ERBB4, SHC1 becomes phosphorylated on tyrosine residues by the tyrosine kinase activity of ERBB4, which enables it to recruit the complex of GRB2 and SOS1, resulting in the guanyl-nucleotide exchange on RAS and activation of RAF and MAP kinase cascade (Kainulainen et al. 2000).
R-HSA-4085001	Sialic acid metabolism	Sialic acids are a family of 9 carbon alpha-keto acids that are usually present in the non reducing terminal of glycoconjuates on the cell surface of eukaryotic cells. These sialylated conjugates play important roles in cell recognition and signaling, neuronal development, cancer metastasis and bacterial or viral infection. More than 50 forms of sialic acid are found in nature, the most abundant being N-acetylneuraminic acid (Neu5Ac, N-acetylneuraminate) (Li & Chen 2012, Wickramasinghe & Medrano 2011). The steps below describe the biosynthesis, transport, utilization and degradation of Neu5Ac in humans.
R-HSA-392518	Signal amplification	In the initial response to injury, platelets adhere to damaged blood vessels, responding to the exposure of collagen from the vascular epithelium. Once adhered they degranulate, releasing stored secondary agents such as ADP and ATP, and synthesized thromboxane A2. These amplify the response, activating and recruiting further platelets to the area and promoting platelet aggregation. Adenosine nucleotides secreted following platelet activation signal through P2 purinergic receptors on the platelet membrane. ADP activates P2Y1 and P2Y12 while ATP activates the ionotropic P2X1 receptor (Kunapuli et al. 2003). Activation of these receptors initiates a complex signaling cascade that ultimately results in platelet activation and thrombus formation (Kahner et al. 2006). ADP stimulation of P2Y1 and P2Y12 involves signaling via both the alpha and gamma:beta components of the heterotrimeric G-protein (Hirsch et al. 2001, 2006).
R-HSA-74749	Signal attenuation	Now with the complete receptor-ligand dissociation and subsequent degradation of insulin in the endosomal lumen, the endosomally associated protein tyrosine phosphatases (PTPs) complete the receptor dephosphorylation. So too are all the receptor substrates dephosphorylated leading to the collapse of the signalling complexes and signal attenuation.
R-HSA-391160	Signal regulatory protein (SIRP) family interactions	Signal regulatory protein (SIRP)alpha, also known as SHPS-1 or SIRPA or CD172a, is a transmembrane protein expressed mostly on myeloid cells. CD47, a widely expressed transmembrane protein, is a ligand for SIRP alpha, with the two proteins constituting a cell-cell communication system. The interaction of SIRP alpha with CD47 is important for the regulation of migration and phagocytosis. SIRP alpha functions as a docking protein to recruit and activate SHP-1 or SHP-2 at the cell membrane in response to extracellular stimuli. SIRP alpha also binds other intracellular proteins including the adaptor molecules Src kinase-associated protein (SKAP2 SKAP55hom/R), Fyn-binding protein/SLP-76-associated phosphoprotein (FYB/SLAP-130) and the tyrosine kinase PYK2. SIRP alpha also binds the extracellular proteins, surfactant-A (SP-A) and surfactant-D (SP-D). <br>In addition to SIRP alpha there are two closely related proteins in the SIRP family namely SIRP beta and SIRP gamma. These three family proteins show high sequence similarity and similar extracellular structural topology, including three Ig domains, but their ligand binding topology might differ. SIRP beta is expressed on myeloid cells, including monocytes, granulocytes and DCs. A natural ligand for SIRP beta remains unknown; SIRP gamma can bind to CD47 but the binding affinity is lower than that of SIRP alpha. 
R-HSA-162582	Signal Transduction	Signal transduction is a process in which extracellular signals elicit changes in cell state and activity. Transmembrane receptors sense changes in the cellular environment by binding ligands, such as hormones and growth factors, or reacting to other types of stimuli, such as light. Stimulation of transmembrane receptors leads to their conformational change which propagates the signal to the intracellular environment by activating downstream signaling cascades. Depending on the cellular context, this may impact cellular proliferation, differentiation, and survival. On the organism level, signal transduction regulates overall growth and behavior. Receptor tyrosine kinases (RTKs) transmit extracellular signals by phosphorylating their protein partners on conserved tyrosine residues. Some of the best studied RTKs are EGFR (reviewed in Avraham and Yarden, 2011), FGFR (reviewed in Eswarakumar et al, 2005), insulin receptor (reviewed in Saltiel and Kahn, 2001), NGF (reviewed in Reichardt, 2006), PDGF (reviewed in Andrae et al, 2008) and VEGF (reviewed in Xie et al, 2004). RTKs frequently activate downstream signaling through RAF/MAP kinases (reviewed in McKay and Morrison, 2007 and Wellbrock et al 2004), AKT (reviewed in Manning and Cantley, 2007) and PLC- gamma (reviewed in Patterson et al), which ultimately results in changes in gene expression and cellular metabolism. Receptor serine/threonine kinases of the TGF-beta family, such as TGF-beta receptors (reviewed in Kang et al. 2009) and BMP receptors (reviewed in Miyazono et al. 2009), transmit extracellular signals by phosphorylating regulatory SMAD proteins on conserved serine and threonine residues. This leads to formation of complexes of regulatory SMADs and SMAD4, which translocate to the nucleus where they act as transcription factors. WNT receptors transmit their signal through beta-catenin. In the absence of ligand, beta-catenin is constitutively degraded in a ubiquitin-dependent manner. WNT receptor stimulation releases beta-catenin from the destruction complex, allowing it to translocate to the nucleus where it acts as a transcriptional regulator (reviewed in MacDonald et al, 2009 and Angers and Moon, 2009). WNT receptors were originally classified as G-protein coupled receptors (GPCRs). Although they are structurally related, GPCRs primarily transmit their signals through G-proteins, which are trimers of alpha, beta and gamma subunits. When a GPCR is activated, it acts as a guanine nucleotide exchange factor, catalyzing GDP to GTP exchange on the G-alpha subunit of the G protein and its dissociation from the gamma-beta heterodimer. The G-alpha subunit regulates the activity of adenylate cyclase, while the gamma-beta heterodimer can activate AKT and PLC signaling (reviewed in Rosenbaum et al. 2009, Oldham and Hamm 2008, Ritter and Hall 2009). NOTCH receptors are activated by transmembrane ligands expressed on neighboring cells, which results in cleavage of NOTCH receptor and release of its intracellular domain. NOTCH intracellular domain translocates to the nucleus where it acts as a transcription factor (reviewed in Kopan and Ilagan, 2009). Integrins are activated by extracellular matrix components, such as fibronectin and collagen, leading to conformational change and clustering of integrins on the cell surface. This results in activation of integrin-linked kinase and other cytosolic kinases and, in co-operation with RTK signaling, regulates survival, proliferation and cell shape and adhesion (reviewed in Hehlgans et al, 2007) . Besides inducing changes in gene expression and cellular metabolism, extracellular signals that trigger the activation of Rho GTP-ases can trigger changes in the organization of cytoskeleton, thereby regulating cell polarity and cell-cell junctions (reviewed in Citi et al, 2011).
R-HSA-445144	Signal transduction by L1	Besides adhesive roles in cell cell interaction, L1 functions as a signal transducing receptor providing neurons with cues from their environment for axonal growth and guidance. L1 associates with beta1 integrins on the cell surface to induce a signaling pathway involving sequential activation of pp60csrc, Vav2 -GEF, Rac1, PAK1, MEK and ERK1/2. L1 stimulates cell migration and neurite outgrowth through the MAP kinases ERK1/2. CHL1 also associates with integrins and activates a MAPK signaling pathway via pp60c-src, MEK and ERK1/2. <br>L1 also binds the Sema3A receptor neuropilin1 and acts as an obligate coreceptor to mediate Sema3A induced growth cone collapse and axon repulsion. This repulsion can be converted to attraction by homophilic binding of L1 on an apposing cell in trans with L1 complexed with Neuropilin1 (NP1) in the responding neuron.<br>L1 also interacts with FGF receptor and activates PLC gamma and DAG, resulting in the production of arachidonic acid and subsequent opening of voltage-gated channels.
R-HSA-1839122	Signaling by activated point mutants of FGFR1	Unlike FGFR2 and FGFR3, FGFR1 appears not to be a frequent target of activating point mutations (reviewed in Wesche, 2011; Turner and Grose, 2010). Germline point mutations at residue P252 have been identified in Pfeiffer syndrome (reviewed in Webster and Donoghue, 1997; Burke, 1998; Cunningham, 2007) while mutation of the same residue arising somatically has been identified in melanoma and lung cancer (Ruhe, 2007; Davies, 2005). Two kinase domain mutations have been characterized in glioblastoma (Rand, 2005; Network TCGA, 2008), both at positions that are also mutated in an autosomal disorder in one of the FGFR family members (Muenke, 1994; Bellus, 1995a; Bellus, 2000; Tavormina, 1995a; Tavormina, 1999).
R-HSA-1839130	Signaling by activated point mutants of FGFR3	Activating point mutations in FGFR3 are found in the extracellular ligand-binding domain, the transmembrane region and the tyrosine kinase domain and are believed to result in ligand-independent activation of the receptor (Webster and Donoghue, 1996; Wenbster, 1997). These mutations, although initially characterized in the context of autosomal skeletal disorders, are now being identified in a range of cancers including bladder, cervical, breast, prostate, head and neck, and multiple myeloma (reviewed in Wesche, 2011). 
R-HSA-1502540	Signaling by Activin	Activin was initially discovered as an activator of follicle stimulating hormone in the pituitary gland. It has since been shown to be an important participant in the differentiation of embryonic cells into mesodermal and endodermal layers. Activin binds the Activin receptor and triggers downstream events: phosphorylation of SMAD2 and SMAD3 followed by activation of gene expression (reviewed in Attisano et al. 1996, Willis et al. 1996, Chen et al. 2006, Hinck 2012). Activins are dimers comprising activin A (INHBA:INHBA), activin AB (INHBA:INHBB), and activin B (INHBB:INHBB). Activin first binds the type II receptor (ACVR2A, ACVR2B) and this complex then interacts with the type I receptor (ACVR1B, ACVR1C) (Attisano et al. 1996). The type II receptor phosphorylates the type I receptor and then the phosphorylated type I receptor phosphorylates SMAD2 and SMAD3. Dimers of phosphorylated SMAD2/3 bind SMAD4 and the resulting ternary complex enters the nucleus and activates target genes.
R-HSA-201451	Signaling by BMP	The TGF-beta/BMP (bone morphogenetic protein) pathway incorporates several signalling pathways that share most, but not all, components of a central signal transduction engine. The general signalling scheme is rather simple: upon binding of a ligand, an activated plasma membrane receptor complex is formed, which passes on the signal towards the nucleus through a phosphorylated receptor-activated SMAD (r-SMAD). In the nucleus, the activated r-SMAD promotes transcription in a complex with a closely-related helper molecule termed the Co-SMAD. However, this simple linear pathway expands into a network when various regulatory components and mechanisms are taken into account. The signalling pathway includes a great variety of different TGF-beta/BMP superfamily ligands and receptors, several types of the r-SMAD, and functionally critical negative feedback loops. The r-SMAD/Co-SMAD can interact with a great number of transcriptional co-activators/co-repressors to regulate positively or negatively effector genes, so that the interpretation of a signal depends on the cell-type and cross talk with other signalling pathways such as Notch, MAPK and Wnt. The pathway plays a number of different biological roles in the control of embryonic and adult cell proliferation and differentiation, and it is implicated in a great number of human diseases.
R-HSA-177929	Signaling by EGFR	The epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) is one member of the ERBB family of transmembrane glycoprotein tyrosine receptor kinases (RTK). Binding of EGFR to its ligands induces conformational change that unmasks the dimerization interface in the extracellular domain of EGFR, leading to receptor homo- or heterodimerization at the cell surface. Dimerization of the extracellular regions of EGFR triggers additional conformational change of the cytoplasmic EGFR regions, enabling the kinase domains of two EGFR molecules to achieve the catalytically active conformation. Ligand activated EGFR dimers trans-autophosphorylate on tyrosine residues in the cytoplasmic tail of the receptor. Phosphorylated tyrosines serve as binding sites for the recruitment of signal transducers and activators of intracellular substrates, which then stimulate intracellular signal transduction cascades that are involved in regulating cellular proliferation, differentiation, and survival. Recruitment of complexes containing GRB2 and SOS1 to phosphorylated EGFR dimers either directly, through phosphotyrosine residues that serve as GRB2 docking sites, or indirectly, through SHC1 recruitment, promotes GDP to GTP exchange on RAS, resulting in the activation of RAF/MAP kinase cascade. Binding of complexes of GRB2 and GAB1 to phosphorylated EGFR dimers leads to formation of the active PI3K complex, conversion of PIP2 into PIP3, and activation of AKT signaling. Phospholipase C-gamma1 (PLCG1) can also be recruited directly, through EGFR phosphotyrosine residues that serve as PLCG1 docking sites, which leads to PLCG1 phosphorylation by EGFR and activation of DAG and IP3 signaling. EGFR signaling is downregulated by the action of ubiquitin ligase CBL. CBL binds directly to the phosphorylated EGFR dimer through the phosphotyrosine Y1045 in the C-tail of EGFR, and after CBL is phosphorylated by EGFR, it becomes active and ubiquitinates phosphorylated EGFR dimers, targeting them for degradation. For a recent review of EGFR signaling, please refer to Avraham and Yarden, 2011. 
R-HSA-1643713	Signaling by EGFR in Cancer	The pathway "Signaling by EGFR in Cancer" shows signaling by constitutively active EGFR cancer variants in the context of "Signaling by EGFR", allowing users to compare cancer events with the wild-type EGFR events. Red lines emphasize cancer related events and physical entities, while wild-type entities and events are shaded. Please refer to "Signaling by Ligand-Responsive EGFR Variants in Cancer", "Signaling by EGFRvIII in Cancer" and "Signaling by Overexpressed Wild-Type EGFR in Cancer" for detailed pathway summations.
R-HSA-5637812	Signaling by EGFRvIII in Cancer	EGFRvIII (EGFR V30_R297delinsG) is the most prevalent EGFR variant in glioblastoma, but it is also found in other cancer types. In-frame deletion of the ligand binding domain in EGFRvIII is frequently accompanied with genomic amplification, resulting in over-expression of EGFRvIII. EGFRvIII dimerizes and autophosphorylates spontaneously and is therefore constitutively active (Fernandes et al. 2001)
R-HSA-1227986	Signaling by ERBB2	ERBB2, also known as HER2 or NEU, is a receptor tyrosine kinase (RTK) belonging to the EGFR family. ERBB2 possesses an extracellular domain that does not bind any known ligand, contrary to other EGFR family members, a single transmembrane domain, and an intracellular domain consisting of an active kinase and a C-tail with multiple tyrosine phosphorylation sites. Inactive ERBB2 is associated with a chaperone heat shock protein 90 (HSP90) and its co-chaperone CDC37 (Xu et al. 2001, Citri et al. 2004, Xu et al. 2005). In addition, ERBB2 is associated with ERBB2IP (also known as ERBIN or LAP2), a protein responsible for proper localization of ERBB2. In epithelial cells, ERBB2IP restricts expression of ERBB2 to basolateral plasma membrane regions (Borg et al. 2000).<br><br> ERBB2 becomes activated by forming a heterodimer with another ligand-activated EGFR family member, either EGFR, ERBB3 or ERBB4, which is accompanied by dissociation of chaperoning proteins HSP90 and CDC37 (Citri et al. 2004), as well as ERBB2IP (Borg et al. 2000) from ERBB2. ERBB2 heterodimers function to promote cell proliferation, cell survival and differentiation, depending on the cellular context. ERBB2 can also be activated by homodimerization when it is overexpressed, in cancer for example. <br><br> In cells expressing both ERBB2 and EGFR, EGF stimulation of EGFR leads to formation of both ERBB2:EGFR heterodimers (Wada et al. 1990, Karunagaran et al. 1996) and EGFR homodimers. Heterodimers of ERBB2 and EGFR trans-autophosphorylate on twelve tyrosine residues, six in the C-tail of EGFR and six in the C-tail of ERBB2 - Y1023, Y1139, Y1196, Y1221, Y1222 and Y1248 (Margolis et al. 1989, Hazan et al. 1990,Walton et al. 1990, Helin et al. 1991, Ricci et al. 1995, Pinkas-Kramarski 1996). Phosphorylated tyrosine residues in the C-tail of EGFR and ERBB2 serve as docking sites for downstream signaling molecules. Three key signaling pathways activated by ERBB2:EGFR heterodimers are RAF/MAP kinase cascade, PI3K-induced AKT signaling, and signaling by phospholipase C gamma (PLCG1). Downregulation of EGFR signaling is mediated by ubiquitin ligase CBL, and is shown under Signaling by EGFR.<br><br> In cells expressing ERBB2 and ERBB3, ERBB3 activated by neuregulin NRG1 or NRG2 binding (Tzahar et al. 1994) forms a heterodimer with ERBB2 (Pinkas-Kramarski et al. 1996, Citri et al. 2004). ERBB3 is the only EGFR family member with no kinase activity, and can only function in heterodimers, with ERBB2 being its preferred heterodimerization partner. After heterodimerization, ERBB2 phosphorylates ten tyrosine residues in the C-tail of ERBB3, Y1054, Y1197, Y1199, Y1222, Y1224, Y1260, Y1262, Y1276, Y1289 and Y1328 (Prigent et al. 1994, Pinkas-Kramarski et al. 1996, Vijapurkar et al. 2003, Li et al. 2007) that subsequently serve as docking sites for downstream signaling molecules, resulting in activation of PI3K-induced AKT signaling and RAF/MAP kinase cascade. Signaling by ERBB3 is downregulated by the action of RNF41 ubiquitin ligase, also known as NRDP1. <br><br> In cells expressing ERBB2 and ERBB4, ligand stimulated ERBB4 can either homodimerize or form heterodimers with ERBB2 (Li et al. 2007), resulting in trans-autophosphorylation of ERBB2 and ERBB4 on C-tail tyrosine residues that will subsequently serve as docking sites for downstream signaling molecules, leading to activation of RAF/MAP kinase cascade and, in the case of ERBB4 CYT1 isoforms, PI3K-induced AKT signaling (Hazan et al. 1990, Cohen et al. 1996, Li et al. 2007, Kaushansky et al. 2008). Signaling by ERBB4 is downregulated by the action of WWP1 and ITCH ubiquitin ligases, and is shown under Signaling by ERBB4.
R-HSA-1236394	Signaling by ERBB4	ERBB4, also known as HER4, belongs to the ERBB family of receptors, which also includes ERBB1 (EGFR i.e. HER1), ERBB2 (HER2 i.e. NEU) and ERBB3 (HER3). Similar to EGFR, ERBB4 has an extracellular ligand binding domain, a single transmembrane domain and a cytoplasmic domain which contains an active tyrosine kinase and a C-tail with multiple phosphorylation sites. At least three and possibly four splicing isoforms of ERBB4 exist that differ in their C-tail and/or the extracellular juxtamembrane regions: ERBB4 JM-A CYT1, ERBB4 JM-A CYT2 and ERBB4 JM-B CYT1 (the existence of ERBB4 JM-B CYT2 has not been confirmed). <br><br>ERBB4 becomes activated by binding one of its seven ligands, three of which, HB-EGF, epiregulin EPR and betacellulin BTC, are EGF-like (Elenius et al. 1997, Riese et al. 1998), while four, NRG1, NRG2, NRG3 and NRG4, belong to the neuregulin family (Tzahar et al. 1994, Carraway et al. 1997, Zhang et al. 1997, Hayes et al. 2007). Upon ligand binding, ERBB4 forms homodimers (Sweeney et al. 2000) or it heterodimerizes with ERBB2 (Li et al. 2007). Dimers of ERBB4 undergo trans-autophosphorylation on tyrosine residues in the C-tail (Cohen et al. 1996, Kaushansky et al. 2008, Hazan et al. 1990, Li et al. 2007), triggering downstream signaling cascades. The pathway Signaling by ERBB4 only shows signaling by ERBB4 homodimers. Signaling by heterodimers of ERBB4 and ERBB2 is shown in the pathway Signaling by ERBB2. Ligand-stimulated ERBB4 is also able to form heterodimers with ligand-stimulated EGFR (Cohen et al. 1996) and ligand-stimulated ERBB3 (Riese et al. 1995). Dimers of ERBB4 with EGFR and dimers of ERBB4 with ERBB3 were demonstrated in mouse cell lines in which human ERBB4 and EGFR or ERBB3 were exogenously expressed. These heterodimers undergo trans-autophosphorylation, but their downstream signaling and physiological significance have not been studied. <br><br><br>All splicing isoforms of ERBB4 possess two tyrosine residues in the C-tail that serve as docking sites for SHC1 (Kaushansky et al. 2008, Pinkas-Kramarski et al. 1996, Cohen et al. 1996). Once bound to ERBB4, SHC1 becomes phosphorylated on tyrosine residues by the tyrosine kinase activity of ERBB4, which enables it to recruit the complex of GRB2 and SOS1, resulting in the guanyl-nucleotide exchange on RAS and activation of RAF and MAP kinase cascade (Kainulainen et al. 2000). <br><br>The CYT1 isoforms of ERBB4 also possess a C-tail tyrosine residue that, upon trans-autophosphorylation, serves as a docking site for the p85 alpha subunit of PI3K (Kaushansky et al. 2008, Cohen et al. 1996), leading to assembly of an active PI3K complex that converts PIP2 to PIP3 and activates AKT signaling (Kainulainen et al. 2000). <br><br>Besides signaling as a transmembrane receptor, ligand activated homodimers of ERBB4 JM-A isoforms (ERBB4 JM-A CYT1 and ERBB4 JM-A CYT2) undergo proteolytic cleavage by ADAM17 (TACE) in the juxtamembrane region, resulting in shedding of the extracellular domain and formation of an 80 kDa membrane bound ERBB4 fragment known as ERBB4 m80 (Rio et al. 2000, Cheng et al. 2003). ERBB4 m80 undergoes further proteolytic cleavage, mediated by the gamma-secretase complex, which releases the soluble 80 kDa ERBB4 intracellular domain, known as ERBB4 s80 or E4ICD, into the cytosol (Ni et al. 2001). ERBB4 s80 is able to translocate to the nucleus, promote nuclear translocation of various transcription factors, and act as a transcription co-factor. In neuronal precursors, ERBB4 s80 binds the complex of TAB and NCOR1, helps to move the complex into the nucleus, and is a co-factor of TAB:NCOR1-mediated inhibition of expression of astrocyte differentiation genes GFAP and S100B (Sardi et al. 2006). In mammary cells, ERBB4 s80 recruits STAT5A transcription factor in the cytosol, shuttles it to the nucleus, and acts as the STAT5A co-factor in binding to and promoting transcription from the beta-casein (CSN2) promoter, and may be involved in the regulation of other lactation-related genes (Williams et al. 2004, Muraoka-Cook et al. 2008). ERBB4 s80 was also shown to bind activated estrogen receptor in the nucleus and act as its transcriptional co-factor in promoting transcription of some estrogen-regulated genes, such as progesterone receptor gene NR3C3 and CXCL12 i.e. SDF1 (Zhu et al. 2006). <br><br>The C-tail of ERBB4 possesses several WW-domain binding motifs (three in CYT1 isoform and two in CYT2 isoform), which enable interaction of ERBB4 with WW-domain containing proteins. ERBB4 s80, through WW-domain binding motifs, interacts with YAP1 transcription factor, a known proto-oncogene, and may be a co-regulator of YAP1-mediated transcription (Komuro et al. 2003, Omerovic et al. 2004). The tumor suppressor WWOX, another WW-domain containing protein, competes with YAP1 in binding to ERBB4 s80 and prevents translocation of ERBB4 s80 to the nucleus (Aqeilan et al. 2005). ERBB4 s80 is also able to translocate to the mitochondrial matrix, presumably when its nuclear translocation is inhibited. Once in the mitochondrion, the BH3 domain of ERBB4, characteristic of BCL2 family members, may enable it to act as a pro-apoptotic factor (Naresh et al. 2006). Activation of ERBB4 in breast cancer cell lines leads to JNK-dependent increase in BRCA1 mRNA level and mitotic cell cycle delay, but the exact mechanism has not been elucidated (Muraoka-Cook et al. 2006). <br><br>WW-domain binding motifs in the C-tail of ERBB4 play an important role in the downregulation of ERBB4 receptor signaling, enabling the interaction of intact ERBB4, ERBB4 m80 and ERBB4 s80 with NEDD4 family of E3 ubiquitin ligases WWP1 and ITCH. The interaction of WWP1 and ITCH with intact ERBB4 is independent of receptor activation and autophosphorylation. Binding of WWP1 and ITCH ubiquitin ligases leads to ubiquitination of ERBB4 and its cleavage products, and subsequent degradation through both proteasomal and lysosomal routes (Omerovic et al. 2007, Feng et al. 2009). In addition, the s80 cleavage product of ERBB4 JM-A CYT-1 isoform is the target of NEDD4 ubiquitin ligase. NEDD4 binds ERBB4 JM-A CYT-1 s80 (ERBB4jmAcyt1s80) through its PIK3R1 interaction site and mediates ERBB4jmAcyt1s80 ubiquitination, thereby decreasing the amount of ERBB4jmAcyt1s80 that reaches the nucleus (Zeng et al. 2009). 
R-HSA-190236	Signaling by FGFR	The 22 members of the fibroblast growth factor (FGF) family of growth factors mediate their cellular responses by binding to and activating the different isoforms encoded by the four receptor tyrosine kinases (RTKs) designated FGFR1, FGFR2, FGFR3 and FGFR4. These receptors are key regulators of several developmental processes in which cell fate and differentiation to various tissue lineages are determined. Unlike other growth factors, FGFs act in concert with heparin or heparan sulfate proteoglycan (HSPG) to activate FGFRs and to induce the pleiotropic responses that lead to the variety of cellular responses induced by this large family of growth factors. An alternative, FGF-independent, source of FGFR activation originates from the interaction with cell adhesion molecules, typically in the context of interactions on neural cell membranes and is crucial for neuronal survival and development.<br><br>Upon ligand binding, receptor dimers are formed and their intrinsic tyrosine kinase is activated causing phosphorylation of multiple tyrosine residues on the receptors. These then serve as docking sites for the recruitment of SH2 (src homology-2) or PTB (phosphotyrosine binding) domains of adaptors, docking proteins or signaling enzymes. Signaling complexes are assembled and recruited to the active receptors resulting in a cascade of phosphorylation events.<br><br>This leads to stimulation of intracellular signaling pathways that control cell proliferation, cell differentiation, cell migration, cell survival and cell shape, depending on the cell type or stage of maturation.<br>
R-HSA-1226099	Signaling by FGFR in disease	A number of skeletal and developmental diseases have been shown to arise as a result of mutations in the FGFR1, 2 and 3 genes. These include dwarfism syndromes (achondroplasia, hypochondroplasia and the neonatal lethal disorders thanatophoric dysplasia I and II), as well as craniosynostosis disorders such as Pfeiffer, Apert, Crouzon, Jackson-Weiss and Muenke syndromes (reviewed in Webster and Donoghue 1997; Burke, 1998, Cunningham, 2007; Harada, 2009). These mutations fall into four general regions of the receptor: a) the immunoglobulin (Ig)-like domain II-III linker region, b) the alternatively spliced second half of the Ig III domain, c) the transmembrane domain and d) the tyrosine kinase domain (reviewed in Webster and Donoghue, 1997). With the exception of mutations in class b), which affect only the relevant splice variant, these mutations may be present in either the 'b' or 'c' isoforms. These activating mutations affect FGFR function by altering or expanding the ligand-binding range of the receptors (see for instance Ibrahimi, 2004a), by promoting ligand-independent dimerization (for instance, Galvin,1996; Neilson and Friesel, 1996; d'Avis,1998) or by increasing the activity of the kinase domain (for instance, Webster, 1996; Naski, 1996; Tavormina, 1999; Bellus, 2000). Thus, a number of the point mutations found in FGFR receptors alter their activity without altering their intrinsic kinase activity. Many of the mutations that promote constitutive dimerization do so by creating or removing cysteine residues; the presence of an unpaired cysteine in the receptor is believed to promote dimerization through the formation of intramolecular disulphide bonds (Galvin, 1996; Robertson, 1998). Paralogous mutations at equivalent positions have been identified in more than one FGF receptor, sometimes giving rise to different diseases. For instance, mutation of the highly conserved FGFR2 Ser252-Pro253 dipeptide in the region between the second and third Ig domain is responsible for virtually all cases of Apert Syndrome (Wilkie, 1995), while paralogous mutations in FGFR1 (S252R) and FGFR3 (P250R) are associated with Pfeiffer and Crouzon syndromes, respectively (Bellus, 1996). FGFR4 is unique in that mutations of this gene are not known to be associated with any developmental disorders.<br><br>Recently, many of the same activating mutations in the FGFR genes that have been characterized in skeletal and developmental disorders have begun to be identified in a range of cancers (reviewed in Turner and Gross, 2010; Greulich and Pollock, 2011; Wesche, 2011). The best established link between a somatic mutation of an FGFR and the development of cancer is in the case of FGFR3, where 50% of bladder cancers have mutations in the FGFR3 coding sequence. Of these mutations, which largely match the activating mutations seen in thanatophoric dysplasias, over half occur at a single residue (S249C) (Cappellen, 1999; van Rhijn, 2002). Activating mutations have also been identified in the coding sequences of FGFR1, 2 and 4 (for review, see Wesche, 2011)<br><br>In addition to activating point mutations, the FGFR1, 2 and 3 genes are subject to misregulation in cancer through gene amplification and translocation events, which are thought to lead to overexpression and ligand-independent dimerization (Weiss, 2010; Turner, 2010; Kunii, 2008; Takeda, 2007; Chesi, 1997; Avet-Loiseau, 1998; Ronchetti, 2001). It is important to note, however, that in each of these cases, the amplification or translocation involve large genomic regions encompassing additional genes, and the definitive roles of the FGFR genes in promoting oncogenesis has not been totally established. In the case of FGFR1, translocation events also give rise to FGFR1 fusion proteins that contain the intracellular kinase domain of the receptor fused to a dimerization domain from the partner gene. These fusions, which are expressed in a pre-leukemic myeloproliferative syndrome, dimerize constitutively based on the dimerization domain provided by the fusion partner and are constitutively active (reviewed in Jackson, 2010).<br><br>
R-HSA-5654736	Signaling by FGFR1	The 22 members of the fibroblast growth factor (FGF) family of growth factors mediate their cellular responses by binding to and activating the different isoforms encoded by the four receptor tyrosine kinases (RTKs) designated FGFR1, FGFR2, FGFR3 and FGFR4. These receptors are key regulators of several developmental processes in which cell fate and differentiation to various tissue lineages are determined. Unlike other growth factors, FGFs act in concert with heparin or heparan sulfate proteoglycan (HSPG) to activate FGFRs and to induce the pleiotropic responses that lead to the variety of cellular responses induced by this large family of growth factors. An alternative, FGF-independent, source of FGFR activation originates from the interaction with cell adhesion molecules, typically in the context of interactions on neural cell membranes and is crucial for neuronal survival and development.<br><br>Upon ligand binding, receptor dimers are formed and their intrinsic tyrosine kinase is activated causing phosphorylation of multiple tyrosine residues on the receptors. These then serve as docking sites for the recruitment of SH2 (src homology-2) or PTB (phosphotyrosine binding) domains of adaptors, docking proteins or signaling enzymes. Signaling complexes are assembled and recruited to the active receptors resulting in a cascade of phosphorylation events.<br><br>This leads to stimulation of intracellular signaling pathways that control cell proliferation, cell differentiation, cell migration, cell survival and cell shape, depending on the cell type or stage of maturation.<br>
R-HSA-1839120	Signaling by FGFR1 amplification mutants	Amplification or activation of FGFR1 has been reported in lung cancer (Weiss, 2001; Marek, 2009; Dutt, 2011), breast cancer (Reis-Filho, 2006; Turner, 2010), oral squamous carcinoma (Freier, 2007), esophageal squamous cell carcinomas (Ishizuka, 2002), ovarian cancer (Gorringe, 2007), bladder cancer (Simon, 2001), prostate cancer (Edwards, 2003; Acevedo, 2007) and rhabodomyosarcoma (Missiaglia, 2009). Unlike the case for FGFR2 amplifications, FGFR1 amplifications are not associated with additional point mutations and affect signaling without altering the intrinsic kinase activity of the receptor. Overexpressed FGFR1 appears to signal at a basal level in a ligand-independent fashion, but is also able to be stimulated by exogenous ligand. Downstream activation may be the result of aberrant paracrine or autocrine stimulation (reviewed in Turner and Gross, 2010; Greulich and Pollock, 2011). FGFR1 amplification has not been conclusively demonstrated to be the causative oncogenic agent in all of the cancer types mentioned above, and other genes in the 8p11 region may also be candidates in some cases (Bass, 2009; Bernard-Pierrot, 2008; Ray, 2004).
R-HSA-1839117	Signaling by FGFR1 fusion mutants	8p11 myeloproliferative syndrome (EMS) is an aggressive disorder that is associated with a translocation event at the FGFR1 gene on chromosome 8p11. Typical symptoms upon diagnosis include eosinophilia and associated T-cell lymphoblastic lymphoma; the disease rapidly advances to acute leukemia, usually of myeloid lineage. At present the only effective treatment is allogenic stem cell transplantation (reviewed in Jackson, 2010). <br><br>At the molecular level, EMS appears to be caused by translocation events on chromosome 8 that create gene fusions between the intracellular domain of FGFR1 and an N-terminal partner gene that encodes a dimerization domain. The resulting fusion protein dimerizes in a ligand-independent fashion based the N-terminal domain provided by the partner protein and stimulates constititutive downstream FGFR1 signaling without altering the intrisic kinase activity of the receptor. To date, 11 partner genes have been identified: ZMYM2, FGFR1OP, FGFR1OP2, HERVK, TRIM24, CUX1, BCR, CEP110, LRRFIP1, MYO18A and CPSF6, although not all have been functionally characterized (reviewed in Jackson, 2010, Turner and Grose, 2010; Wesche, 2011). <br>Where examined, cell lines carrying FGFR1 fusion genes have been shown to be transforming and to support IL3-independent proliferation through anti-apoptotic, prosurvival pathways(Lelievre, 2008; Ollendorff, 1999; Chase, 2007; Guasch, 2001; Wasag 2011; Roumiantsev, 2004; Demiroglu, 2001; Smedley, 1999). Signaling appears to occur predominantly through PLCgamma, PI3K and STAT signaling, with a more minor contribution from MAPK activation. Because the fusion proteins lack the FRS2-binding site, the mechanism of MAPK activation is unclear. Recruitment of GRB2:SOS1 through recruitment of SHC is one possibility (Guasch, 2001).
R-HSA-5655302	Signaling by FGFR1 in disease	The FGFR1 gene has been shown to be subject to activating mutations, chromosomal rearrangements and gene amplification leading to a variety of proliferative and developmental disorders depending on whether these events occur in the germline or arise somatically (reviewed in Webster and Donoghue, 1997; Burke, 1998; Cunningham, 2007; Wesche, 2011; Greulich and Pollock, 2011). <br><br><br>Activating mutation P252R in FGFR1 is associated with the development of Pfeiffer syndrome, characterized by craniosynostosis (premature fusion of several sutures in the skull) and broadened thumbs and toes (Muenke, 1994; reviewed in Cunningham, 2007). This residue falls in a highly conserved Pro-Ser dipeptide between the second and third Ig domains of the extracellular region of the receptor. The mutation is thought to increase the number of hydrogen bonds formed with the ligand and to thereby increase ligand-binding affinity (Ibrahimi, 2004a). Unlike other FGF receptors, few activating point mutations in the FGFR1 coding sequence have been identified in cancer. Point mutations in the Ig II-III linker analagous to the P252R Pfeiffer syndrome mutation have been identified in lung cancer and melanoma (Ruhe, 2007; Davies, 2005), and two kinase-domain mutations in FGFR1 have been identified in glioblastoma (Rand, 2005, Network TCGA, 2008).<br><br>In contrast, FGFR1 is a target of chromosomal rearrangements in a number of cancers. FGFR1 has been shown to be recurrently translocated in the 8p11 myeloproliferative syndrome (EMS), a pre-leukemic condition also known as stem cell leukemia/lymphoma (SCLL) that rapidly progresses to leukemia. This translocation fuses the kinase domain of FGFR1 with the dimerization domain of one of 10 identified fusion partners, resulting in the constitutive dimerization and activation of the kinase (reviewed in Jackson, 2010). <br><br>Amplification of the FGFR1 gene has been implicated as a oncogenic factor in a range of cancers, including breast, ovarian, bladder, lung, oral squamous carcinomas, and rhabdomyosarcoma (reviewed in Turner and Grose, 2010; Wesche, 2011; Greulich and Pollock, 2011), although there are other candidate genes in the amplified region and the definitive role of FGFR1 has not been fully established.<br>
R-HSA-5654738	Signaling by FGFR2	The 22 members of the fibroblast growth factor (FGF) family of growth factors mediate their cellular responses by binding to and activating the different isoforms encoded by the four receptor tyrosine kinases (RTKs) designated FGFR1, FGFR2, FGFR3 and FGFR4. These receptors are key regulators of several developmental processes in which cell fate and differentiation to various tissue lineages are determined. Unlike other growth factors, FGFs act in concert with heparin or heparan sulfate proteoglycan (HSPG) to activate FGFRs and to induce the pleiotropic responses that lead to the variety of cellular responses induced by this large family of growth factors. An alternative, FGF-independent, source of FGFR activation originates from the interaction with cell adhesion molecules, typically in the context of interactions on neural cell membranes and is crucial for neuronal survival and development.<br><br>Upon ligand binding, receptor dimers are formed and their intrinsic tyrosine kinase is activated causing phosphorylation of multiple tyrosine residues on the receptors. These then serve as docking sites for the recruitment of SH2 (src homology-2) or PTB (phosphotyrosine binding) domains of adaptors, docking proteins or signaling enzymes. Signaling complexes are assembled and recruited to the active receptors resulting in a cascade of phosphorylation events.<br><br>This leads to stimulation of intracellular signaling pathways that control cell proliferation, cell differentiation, cell migration, cell survival and cell shape, depending on the cell type or stage of maturation.<br>
R-HSA-2023837	Signaling by FGFR2 amplification mutants	FGFR2 amplifications have been identified in 10% of gastric cancers, where they are associated with poor prognosis diffuse cancers (Hattori, 1996; Ueda, 1999; Shin, 2000; Kunii, 2008) , and in ~1% of breast cancers (Turner, 2010; Tannheimer, 2000). FGFR2 amplification often occur in conjunction with deletions of C-terminal exons, resulting in expression of a internalization- and degradation-resistant form of the receptor (Takeda, 1999; Cha, 2008, 2009). Amplification affects signaling without altering the intrinsic kinase activity of the receptor. Signaling through overexpressed FGFR2 also shows evidence of being ligand-independent and sensitive to FGFR inhibitors (Lorenzi, 1997; Takeda, 1999; Cha, 2009).
R-HSA-5655253	Signaling by FGFR2 in disease	The FGFR2 gene has been shown to be subject to activating mutations and gene amplification leading to a variety of proliferative and developmental disorders depending on whether these events occur in the germline or arise somatically. Activating FGFR2 mutations in the germline give rise to a range of craniosynostotic conditions including Pfeiffer, Apert, Jackson-Weiss, Crouzon and Beare-Stevensen Cutis Gyrata syndromes. These autosomal dominant skeletal disorders are characterized by premature fusion of several sutures in the skull, and in some cases also involve syndactyly (abnormal bone fusions in the hands and feet) (reviewed in Webster and Donoghue, 1997; Burke, 1998; Cunningham, 2007). <br><br>Activating FGFR2 mutations arising somatically have been linked to the development of gastric and endometrial cancers (reviewed in Greulich and Pollock, 2011; Wesche, 2011). Many of these mutations are similar or identical to those that contribute to the autosomal disorders described above. Notably, loss-of-function mutations in FGFR2 have also been recently described in melanoma (Gartside, 2009). FGFR2 may also contribute to tumorigenesis through overexpression, as FGFR2 has been identified as a target of gene amplification in gastric and breast cancers (Kunii, 2008; Takeda, 2007).
R-HSA-5654741	Signaling by FGFR3	The 22 members of the fibroblast growth factor (FGF) family of growth factors mediate their cellular responses by binding to and activating the different isoforms encoded by the four receptor tyrosine kinases (RTKs) designated FGFR1, FGFR2, FGFR3 and FGFR4. These receptors are key regulators of several developmental processes in which cell fate and differentiation to various tissue lineages are determined. Unlike other growth factors, FGFs act in concert with heparin or heparan sulfate proteoglycan (HSPG) to activate FGFRs and to induce the pleiotropic responses that lead to the variety of cellular responses induced by this large family of growth factors. An alternative, FGF-independent, source of FGFR activation originates from the interaction with cell adhesion molecules, typically in the context of interactions on neural cell membranes and is crucial for neuronal survival and development.<br><br>Upon ligand binding, receptor dimers are formed and their intrinsic tyrosine kinase is activated causing phosphorylation of multiple tyrosine residues on the receptors. These then serve as docking sites for the recruitment of SH2 (src homology-2) or PTB (phosphotyrosine binding) domains of adaptors, docking proteins or signaling enzymes. Signaling complexes are assembled and recruited to the active receptors resulting in a cascade of phosphorylation events.<br><br>This leads to stimulation of intracellular signaling pathways that control cell proliferation, cell differentiation, cell migration, cell survival and cell shape, depending on the cell type or stage of maturation.<br>
R-HSA-5655332	Signaling by FGFR3 in disease	The FGFR3 gene has been shown to be subject to activating mutations and gene amplification leading to a variety of proliferative and developmental disorders depending on whether these events occur in the germline or arise somatically. <br><br>Activating mutations in FGFR3 are associated with the development of a range of skeletal dysplasias that result in dwarfism (reviewed in Webster and Donoghue, 1997; Burke et al, 1998; Harada et al, 2009). The most common form of human dwarfism is achondroplasia (ACH), which is caused by mutations G380R and G375C in the transmembrane domain of FGFR3 that are thought to promote ligand-independent dimerization (Rousseau et al, 1994; Shiang et al, 1994; Bellus et al, 1995a) Hypochondroplasia (HCH) is a milder form dwarfism that is the result of mutations in the tyrosine kinase domain of FGFR3 (Bellus et al, 1995b). Two neonatal lethal conditions, thanatophoric dysplasia type I and II (TDI and TDII) are also the result of mutations in FGFR3; TDI arises from a range of mutations that either result in the formation of unpaired cysteine residues in the extracellular region that promote aberrant ligand-independent dimerization or by mutations that introduce stop codons (Rousseau et al, 1995; Rousseau et al, 1996, D'Avis et al,1998). A single mutation, K650E in the second tyrosine kinase domain of FGFR3 is responsible for all identified cases of TDII (Tavormina et al, 1995a, b). Other missense mutations at the same K650 residue give rise to Severe Achondroplasia with Developmental Disorders and Acanthosis Nigricans (SADDAN) syndrome (Tavormina et al, 1999; Bellus et al, 1999). The severity of the phenotype arising from many of the activating FGFR3 mutations has recently been shown to correlate with the extent to which the mutations activate the receptor (Naski et al, 1996; Bellus et al, 2000) <br><br>In addition to mutations that cause dwarfism syndromes, a Pro250Arg mutation in the conserved dipeptide between the IgII and IgIII domains has been identified in an atypical craniosynostosis condition (Bellus et al, 1996; Reardon et al, 1997). This mutation, which is paralogous to mutations seen in FGFR1 and 2 in Pfeiffer and Apert Syndrome, respectively, results in an increase in ligand-binding affinity for the receptor (Ibrahimi et al, 2004b).<br><br><br>Of all the FGF receptors, FGFR3 has perhaps the best established link to the development in cancer. 50% of bladder cancers have somatic mutations in the coding sequence of FGFR3; of these, more than half occur in the extracellular region at a single position (S249C) (Cappellen et al, 1999; Naski et al, 1996; di Martino et al, 2009, Sibley et al, 2001). Activating mutations are also seen in the juxta- and trans-membrane domains, as well as in the kinase domain (reviewed in Weshe et al, 2011). As is the case for the other receptors, many of the activating mutations that are seen in FGFR3-related cancers mimic the germline FGFR3 mutations that give rise to autosomal skeletal disorders and include both ligand-dependent and independent mechanisms (reviewed in Webster and Donoghue, 1997; Burke et al, 1998). In addition to activating mutations, the FGFR3 gene is subject to a translocation event in 15% of multiple myelomas (Avet-Loiseau et al, 1998; Chesi et al, 1997). This chromosomal rearrangement puts the FGFR3 gene under the control of the highly active IGH promoter and promotes overexpression and constitutive activation of FGFR3. In a small proportion of multiple myelomas, the translocation event is accompanied by activating mutations in the FGFR3 coding sequence (Chesi et al, 1997).
R-HSA-5654743	Signaling by FGFR4	The 22 members of the fibroblast growth factor (FGF) family of growth factors mediate their cellular responses by binding to and activating the different isoforms encoded by the four receptor tyrosine kinases (RTKs) designated FGFR1, FGFR2, FGFR3 and FGFR4. These receptors are key regulators of several developmental processes in which cell fate and differentiation to various tissue lineages are determined. Unlike other growth factors, FGFs act in concert with heparin or heparan sulfate proteoglycan (HSPG) to activate FGFRs and to induce the pleiotropic responses that lead to the variety of cellular responses induced by this large family of growth factors. An alternative, FGF-independent, source of FGFR activation originates from the interaction with cell adhesion molecules, typically in the context of interactions on neural cell membranes and is crucial for neuronal survival and development.<br><br>Upon ligand binding, receptor dimers are formed and their intrinsic tyrosine kinase is activated causing phosphorylation of multiple tyrosine residues on the receptors. These then serve as docking sites for the recruitment of SH2 (src homology-2) or PTB (phosphotyrosine binding) domains of adaptors, docking proteins or signaling enzymes. Signaling complexes are assembled and recruited to the active receptors resulting in a cascade of phosphorylation events.<br><br>This leads to stimulation of intracellular signaling pathways that control cell proliferation, cell differentiation, cell migration, cell survival and cell shape, depending on the cell type or stage of maturation.<br>
R-HSA-5655291	Signaling by FGFR4 in disease	FGFR4 is perhaps the least well studied of the FGF receptors, and unlike the case for the other FGFR genes, mutations in FGFR4 are not known to be associated with any developmental disorders. Recently, however, somatically arising mutations in the FGFR4 coding sequence have begun to be identified in some cancers. 8% of rhabdomyosarcomas have activating mutations in the kinase domain of FGFR4. Two of these mutations - N535K (paralogous to the FGFR2 N550K allele found in endometrial cancers) and V550E - have been shown to support the oncogenic transformation of NIH 3T3 cells (Taylor, 2009). An FGFR4 Y367C mutation has also been identified in breast cancers (Ruhe, 2007; Roidl, 2010); mutations of paralogous residues in FGFR2 and FGFR3 are associated with both skeletal dysplasias and the development of diverse cancers (Pollock, 2007; Ruhe, 2007; Rousseau, 1996; Chesi, 1997, 2001).<br><br><br>Finally, a SNP at position 388 of FGFR4 is associated with aggressive disease development. Expression of the G388R allele in breast, colorectal and prostate cancers is correlated with rapid progression times and increased rates of recurrence and metastasis (Bange, 2002; Spinola, 2005; Wang, 2004).
R-HSA-372790	Signaling by GPCR	G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs; 7TM receptors; seven transmembrane domain receptors; heptahelical receptors; G protein-linked receptors [GPLR]) are the largest family of transmembrane receptors in humans, accounting for more than 1% of the protein-coding capacity of the human genome. All known GPCRs share a common architecture of seven membrane-spanning helices connected by intra- and extracellular loops. The extracellular loops contain two highly-conserved cysteine residues that form disulphide bonds to stabilize the structure of the receptor. They recognize diverse messengers such as light, odorants, small molecules, hormones and neurotransmitters. Most GPCRs act as guanine nucleotide exchange factors; activated by ligand binding, they promote GDP-GTP exchange on associated heterotrimeric guanine nucleotide-binding (G) proteins. There are two models for GPCR-G Protein interactions: 1) ligand-GPCR binding first, then binding to G Proteins; 2) "Pre-coupling" of GPCRs and G Proteins before ligand binding (review Oldham WM and Hamm HE, 2008). These in turn activate effector enzymes or ion channels. GPCRs are involved in a range of physiological roles which include the visual sense, smell, behavioural regulation, functions of the autonomic nervous system and regulation of the immune system and inflammation.<br>GPCRs are divided into 6 classes based on sequence homology and functional similarity; the main mammalian families are classes A/1-C/3;<br><br>Class A/1 (Rhodopsin-like)<br>Class B/2 (Secretin receptor family)<br>Class C/3 (Metabotropic glutamate/pheromones)<br>Class D/4 (fungal mating pheromone receptors)<br>Class E/5 (cAMP receptors)<br>Class F/6 (Frizzled/Smoothened)<br><br>Here, those Class A/1 (Rhodopsin-like) receptors that bind peptide ligands have been annotated. The binding events mediated by other classes of receptors, as well as the downstream events triggered by receptor-ligand interactions will be annotated in future releases of Reactome.
R-HSA-5358351	Signaling by Hedgehog	Hedgehog (Hh) is a secreted morphogen that regulates developmental processes in vertebrates including limb bud formation, neural tube patterning, cell growth and differentiation (reviewed in Hui and Angers, 2011). Hh signaling also contributes to stem cell homeostasis in adult tissues. Downregulation of Hh signaling can lead to neonatal abnormalities, while upregulation of signaling is associated with the development of various cancers (Beachy et al, 2004; Jiang and Hui, 2008; Hui and Angers, 2011).<br><br>Hh signaling is switched between 'off' and an 'on' states to differentially regulate an intracellular signaling cascade that targets the Gli transcription factors. In the absence of Hh ligand, cytosolic Gli proteins are cleaved to yield a truncated form that translocates into the nucleus and represses target gene transcription. Binding of Hh to the Patched (PTC) receptor on the cell surface stabilizes the Gli proteins in their full-length transcriptional activator form, stimulating Hh-dependent gene expression (reviewed in Hui and Angers, 2011; Briscoe and Therond, 2013).<br><br>
R-HSA-2028269	Signaling by Hippo	Human Hippo signaling is a network of reactions that regulates cell proliferation and apoptosis, centered on a three-step kinase cascade. The cascade was discovered by analysis of Drosophila mutations that lead to tissue overgrowth, and human homologues of its components have since been identified and characterized at a molecular level. Data from studies of mice carrying knockout mutant alleles of the genes as well as from studies of somatic mutations in these genes in human tumors are consistent with the conclusion that in mammals, as in flies, the Hippo cascade is required for normal regulation of cell proliferation and defects in the pathway are associated with cell overgrowth and tumorigenesis (Oh and Irvine 2010; Pan 2010; Zhao et al. 2010). This group of reactions is also notable for its abundance of protein:protein interactions mediated by WW domains and PPxY sequence motifs (Sudol and Harvey 2010).<p>There are two human homologues of each of the three Drosophila kinases, whose functions are well conserved: expression of human proteins rescues fly mutants. The two members of each pair of human homologues have biochemically indistinguishable functions. Autophosphorylated STK3 (MST2) and STK4 (MST1) (homologues of Drosophila Hippo) catalyze the phosphorylation and activation of LATS1 and LATS2 (homologues of Drosophila Warts) and of the accessory proteins MOB1A and MOB1B (homologues of Drosophila Mats). LATS1 and LATS2 in turn catalyze the phosphorylation of the transcriptional co-activators YAP1 and WWTR1 (TAZ) (homologues of Drosophila Yorkie).<p>In their unphosphorylated states, YAP1 and WWTR1 freely enter the nucleus and function as transcriptional co-activators. In their phosphorylated states, however, YAP1 and WWTR1 are instead bound by 14-3-3 proteins, YWHAB and YWHAE respectively, and sequestered in the cytosol.<p>Several accessory proteins are required for the three-step kinase cascade to function. STK3 (MST2) and STK4 (MST1) each form a complex with SAV1 (homologue of Drosophila Salvador), and LATS1 and LATS2 form complexes with MOB1A and MOB1B (homologues of Drosophila Mats).<p>In Drosophila a complex of three proteins, Kibra, Expanded, and Merlin, can trigger the Hippo cascade. A human homologue of Kibra, WWC1, has been identified and indirect evidence suggests that it can regulate the human Hippo pathway (Xiao et al. 2011). A molecular mechanism for this interaction has not yet been worked out and the molecular steps that trigger the Hippo kinase cascade in humans are unknown.<p>Four additional processes related to human Hippo signaling, although incompletely characterized, have been described in sufficient detail to allow their annotation. All are of physiological interest as they are likely to be parts of mechanisms by which Hippo signaling is modulated or functionally linked to other signaling processes. First, the caspase 3 protease cleaves STK3 (MST2) and STK4 (MST1), releasing inhibitory carboxyterminal domains in each case, leading to increased kinase activity and YAP1 / TAZ phosphorylation (Lee et al. 2001). Second, cytosolic AMOT (angiomotin) proteins can bind YAP1 and WWTR1 (TAZ) in their unphosphorylated states, a process that may provide a Hippo-independent mechanism to down-regulate the activities of these proteins (Chan et al. 2011). Third, WWTR1 (TAZ) and YAP1 bind ZO-1 and 2 proteins (Remue et al. 2010; Oka et al. 2010). Fourth, phosphorylated WWTR1 (TAZ) binds and sequesters DVL2, providing a molecular link between Hippo and Wnt signaling (Varelas et al. 2010).
R-HSA-74752	Signaling by Insulin receptor	Insulin binding to its receptor results in receptor autophosphorylation on tyrosine residues and the tyrosine phosphorylation of insulin receptor substrates (e.g. IRS and Shc) by the insulin receptor tyrosine kinase. This allows association of IRSs with downstream effectors such as PI-3K via its Src homology 2 (SH2) domains leading to end point events such as Glut4 (Slc2a4) translocation. Shc when tyrosine phosphorylated associates with Grb2 and can thus activate the Ras/MAPK pathway independent of the IRSs.<p>Signal transduction by the insulin receptor is not limited to its activation at the cell surface. The activated ligand-receptor complex initially at the cell surface, is internalised into endosomes itself a process which is dependent on tyrosine autophosphorylation. Endocytosis of activated receptors has the dual effect of concentrating receptors within endosomes and allows the insulin receptor tyrosine kinase to phosphorylate substrates that are spatially distinct from those accessible at the plasma membrane. Acidification of the endosomal lumen, due to the presence of proton pumps, results in dissociation of insulin from its receptor. (The endosome constitutes the major site of insulin degradation). This loss of the ligand-receptor complex attenuates any further insulin-driven receptor re-phosphorylation events and leads to receptor dephosphorylation by extra-lumenal endosomally-associated protein tyrosine phosphatases (PTPs). The identity of these PTPs is not clearly established yet. A discussion of candidates will be added in the near future.
R-HSA-449147	Signaling by Interleukins	Interleukins are low molecular weight proteins that bind to cell surface receptors and act in an autocrine and/or paracrine fashion. They were first identified as factors produced by leukocytes but are now known to be produced by many other cells throughout the body. They have pleiotropic effects on cells which bind them, impacting processes such as tissue growth and repair, hematopoietic homeostasis, and multiple levels of the host defense against pathogens where they are an essential part of the immune system.
R-HSA-2586552	Signaling by Leptin	Leptin (LEP, OB, OBS), a circulating adipokine, and its receptor LEPR (DB, OBR) control food intake and energy balance and are implicated in obesity-related diseases (recently reviewed in Amitani et al. 2013, Dunmore and Brown 2013, Cottrell and Mercer 2012, La Cava 2012, Marroqui et al. 2012, Paz-Filho et al. 2012, Denver et al. 2011, Lee 2011, Marino et al. 2011, Morton and Schwartz 2011, Scherer and Buettner 2011, Shan and Yeo 2011, Wauman and Tavernier 2011, Dardeno et al. 2010, Bjorbaek 2009, Morris and Rui 2009, Myers et al. 2008), including cancer (Guo et al. 2012), inflammation (Newman and Gonzalez-Perez 2013, Iikuni et al. 2008), and angiogenesis (Gonzalez-Perez et al. 2013).<br>The identification of spontaneous mutations in the leptin gene (ob or LEP) and the leptin receptor gene (Ob-R, db or LEPR) genes in mice opened up a new field in obesity research. Leptin was discovered as the product of the gene affected by the ob (obesity) mutation, which causes obesity in mice. Likewise LEPR is the product of the gene affected by the db (diabetic) mutation. Leptin binding to LEPR induces canonical (JAK2/STATs; MAPK/ERK 1/2, PI-3K/AKT) and non-canonical signaling pathways (PKC, JNK, p38 MAPK and AMPK) in diverse cell types. The binding of leptin to the long isoform of LEPR (OB-Rl) initiates a phosphorylation cascade that results in transcriptional activation of target genes by STAT5 and STAT3 and activation of the PI3K pathway(not shown here), the MAPK/ERK pathway, and the mTOR/S6K pathway. Shorter LEPR isoforms with truncated intracellular domains are unable to activate the STAT pathway, but can transduce signals by way of activation of JAK2, IRS-1 or ERKs, including MAPKs.<br>LEPR is constitutively bound to the JAK2 kinase. Binding of LEP to LEPR causes a conformational change in LEPR that activates JAK2 autophosphorylation followed by phosphorylation of LEPR by JAK2. Phosphorylated LEPR binds STAT3, STAT5, and SHP2 which are then phosphorylated by JAK2. Phosphorylated JAK2 binds SH2B1 which then binds IRS1/2, resulting in phosphorylation of IRS1/2 by JAK2. Phosphorylated STAT3 and STAT5 dimerize and translocate to the nucleus where they activate transcription of target genes (Jovanovic et al. 2010). SHP2 activates the MAPK pathway. IRS1/2 activate the PI3K/AKT pathway which may be the activator of mTOR/S6K.<br>Several isoforms of LEPR have been identified (reviewed in Gorska et al. 2010). The long isoform (LEPRb, OBRb) is expressed in the hypothalamus and all types of immune cells. It is the only isoform known to fully activate signaling pathways in response to leptin. Shorter isoforms (LEPRa, LEPRc, LEPRd, and a soluble isoform LEPRe) are able to interact with JAK kinases and activate other pathways, however their roles in energy homeostasis are not fully characterized. 
R-HSA-5637815	Signaling by Ligand-Responsive EGFR Variants in Cancer	Ligand-responsive EGFR cancer variants harbor mutations in the kinase domain or point mutations in the extracellular domain. These altered EGFR proteins are able to signal in the absence of ligands, but their ligand binding ability is preserved and downstream signaling is potentiated when ligand is available (Greulich et al. 2005, Lee et al. 2006).
R-HSA-1181150	Signaling by NODAL	Signaling by NODAL is essential for patterning of the axes of the embryo and formation of mesoderm and endoderm (reviewed in Schier 2009, Shen 2007). The NODAL proprotein is secreted and cleaved extracellularly to yield mature NODAL. Mature NODAL homodimerizes and can also form heterodimers with LEFTY1, LEFTY2, or CERBERUS, which negatively regulate NODAL signaling. NODAL also forms heterodimers with GDF1, which increases NODAL activity. NODAL dimers bind the NODAL receptor comprising a type I Activin receptor (ACVR1B or ACVR1C), a type II Activin receptor (ACVR2A or ACVR2B), and an EGF-CFC coreceptor (CRIPTO or CRYPTIC). After binding NODAL, the type II activin receptor phosphorylates the type I activin receptor which then phosphorylates SMAD2 and SMAD3 (R-SMADs). Phosphorylated SMAD2 and SMAD3 form hetero-oligomeric complexes with SMAD4 (CO-SMAD) and transit from the cytosol to the nucleus. Within the nucleus the SMAD complexes interact with transcription factors such as FOXH1 to activate transcription of target genes.
R-HSA-157118	Signaling by NOTCH	The Notch Signaling Pathway (NSP) is a highly conserved pathway for cell-cell communication. NSP is involved in the regulation of cellular differentiation, proliferation, and specification. For example, it is utilised by continually renewing adult tissues such as blood, skin, and gut epithelium not only to maintain stem cells in a proliferative, pluripotent, and undifferentiated state but also to direct the cellular progeny to adopt different developmental cell fates. Analogously, it is used during embryonic development to create fine-grained patterns of differentiated cells, notably during neurogenesis where the NSP controls patches such as that of the vertebrate inner ear where individual hair cells are surrounded by supporting cells.<br>This process is known as lateral inhibition: a molecular mechanism whereby individual cells within a field are stochastically selected to adopt particular cell fates and the NSP inhibits their direct neighbours from doing the same. The NSP has been adopted by several other biological systems for binary cell fate choice. In addition, the NSP is also used during vertebrate segmentation to divide the growing embryo into regular blocks called somites which eventually form the vertebrae. The core of this process relies on regular pulses of Notch signaling generated from a molecular oscillator in the presomatic mesoderm.<br>The Notch receptor is synthesized in the rough endoplasmic reticulum as a single polypeptide precursor. Newly synthesized Notch receptor is proteolytically cleaved in the trans-golgi network, creating a heterodimeric mature receptor comprising of non-covalently associated extracellular and transmembrane subunits. This assembly travels to the cell surface ready to interact with specific ligands. Following ligand activation and further proteolytic cleavage, an intracellular domain is released and translocates to the nucleus where it regulates gene expression.
R-HSA-1980143	Signaling by NOTCH1	NOTCH1 functions as both a transmembrane receptor presented on the cell surface and as a transcriptional regulator in the nucleus.<br><br>NOTCH1 receptor presented on the plasma membrane is activated by a membrane bound ligand expressed in trans on the surface of a neighboring cell. In trans, ligand binding triggers proteolytic cleavage of NOTCH1 and results in release of the NOTCH1 intracellular domain, NICD1, into the cytosol.<br><br>NICD1 translocates to the nucleus where it associates with RBPJ (also known as CSL or CBF) and mastermind-like (MAML) proteins (MAML1, MAML2, MAML3 or MAMLD1) to form NOTCH1 coactivator complex. NOTCH1 coactivator complex activates transcription of genes that possess RBPJ binding sites in their promoters. <br><br>
R-HSA-2691230	Signaling by NOTCH1 HD Domain Mutants in Cancer	NOTCH1 heterodimerization domain mutations are frequently found in T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia (T-ALL) (Weng et al. 2004) and result in constitutive activity of NOTCH1 mutants (Malecki et al. 2006).
R-HSA-2894858	Signaling by NOTCH1 HD+PEST Domain Mutants in Cancer	Mutations in the heterodimerization domain (HD) and PEST domain of NOTCH1 are frequently found in cis in T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia. While HD mutations alone result in up to ~10-fold increase in NOTCH1 transcriptional activity and PEST domain mutations alone result in up to ~2-fold increase in NOTCH1 transcriptional activity, in cis mutations of HD and PEST domains act synergistically, increasing NOTCH1 transcriptional activity up to ~40-fold (Weng et al. 2004).
R-HSA-2644603	Signaling by NOTCH1 in Cancer	Human NOTCH1 was cloned as a chromosome 9 gene, translocated to the T-cell beta receptor (TCBR) promoter on chromosome 7 in T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia (T-ALL) (Ellisen et al. 1991). This translocation, present in only a small percentage of T-ALL patients, results in the overexpression of a truncated NOTCH1 receptor, which lacks almost the entire extracellular domain, in T lymphocytes. Oncogenic NOTCH1 mutations were subsequently found to be present in >50% of T-ALL patients, with hotspots in the heterodimerization domain (HD domain) and PEST domain of NOTCH1 (Weng et al. 2004). <br><br>Normal NOTCH1 becomes activated by binding DLL (DLL1 or DLL4) or JAG (JAG1 or JAG2) ligands expressed on the surface of a neighboring cell, which leads to proteolytic cleavage of NOTCH1 by ADAM10/17 and gamma-secretase, and release of the NOTCH1 intracellular domain (NICD1) which regulates expression of genes that play important roles in the development of T lymphocytes (Washburn et al. 1997. Radtke et al. 1999, Maillard et al. 2004, Sambandam et al. 2005, Tan et al. 2005). Mutations in the HD domain, responsible for association of NOTCH1 extracellular and transmembrane regions after furin-mediated cleavage of NOTCH1 precursor, as well as the truncation of the NOTCH1 extracellular domain by the rare T-ALL translocation, enable constitutive production of NICD1, in the absence of ligand binding (Malecki et al. 2006, Ellisen et al. 1991).<br><br>Mutations in the NOTCH1 PEST domain interfere with FBXW7 (FBW7)-mediated ubiquitination and degradation of NICD1, resulting in prolonged half-life and increased transcriptional activity of NICD1, which promotes growth and division of T-lymphocytes (Weng et al. 2004, Thompson et al. 2007, O'Neil et al. 2007).<br><br>Mutations in the HD domain and PEST domain of NOTCH1 are frequently found in cis in T-ALL. While HD mutations alone result in up to ~10-fold increase in NOTCH1 transcriptional activity and PEST domain mutations alone result in up to ~2-fold increase in NOTCH1 transcriptional activity, in cis mutations of HD and PEST domains act synergistically, increasing NOTCH1 transcriptional activity up to ~40-fold (Weng et al. 2004).<br><br>FBXW7 (FBW7), a component of the SCF (SKP1, CUL1, and F-box protein) ubiquitin ligase complex SCF-FBW7 involved in the degradation of NOTCH1 (Oberg et al. 2001, Wu et al. 2001, Fryer et al. 2004), is subject to loss of function mutations in T-ALL (Akhoondi et al. 2007, Thompson et al. 2007, O'Neil et al. 2007) which are mutually exclusive with NOTCH1 PEST domain mutations (Thompson et al. 2007, O'Neil et al. 2007).<br><br>Although gamma-secretase inhibitors (GSIs) are successfully used in vitro to inhibit NOTCH1 signaling in T-ALL cell lines, the gamma-secretase complex has many other substrates besides NOTCH. The specificity of GSIs is therefore limited and, as they are not considered to be particularly promising drugs for the clinical treatment of T-ALL (reviewed by Purow, 2012), they have not been annotated.<br><br>For a recent review of NOTCH1 signaling in cancer, please refer to Grabher et al. 2006.
R-HSA-2644602	Signaling by NOTCH1 PEST Domain Mutants in Cancer	NOTCH1 PEST domain mutations are frequently found in T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia (T-ALL). PEST domain mutations interfere with ubiquitination-mediated NOTCH1 downregulation and result in prolonged half-life of the intracellular NOTCH1 fragment, NICD1, and increased NICD1 transcriptional activity (Weng et al. 2004, Thompson et al. 2007, O'Neil et al. 2007).
R-HSA-2660825	Signaling by NOTCH1 t(7;9)(NOTCH1:M1580_K2555) Translocation Mutant	Human NOTCH1 was cloned as a chromosome 9 gene, translocated to the T-cell beta receptor (TCBR) promoter on chromosome 7 in T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia (T-ALL) (Ellisen et al. 1991). The translocated gene was found to be homologous to Drosophila Notch, and was initially named TAN-1 (translocation-associated Notch homolog). Although the translocation t(7;9)(q34;q34.3) is present in a small percentage of T-ALL patients, the mutant protein is highly oncogenic and its overexpression causes T-ALL-like illness in mice (Pear et al. 1996).
R-HSA-1980145	Signaling by NOTCH2	NOTCH2 is activated by binding Delta-like and Jagged ligands (DLL/JAG) expressed in trans on neighboring cells (Shimizu et al. 1999, Shimizu et al. 2000, Hicks et al. 2000, Ji et al. 2004). In trans ligand-receptor binding is followed by ADAM10 mediated (Gibb et al. 2010, Shimizu et al. 2000) and gamma secretase complex mediated cleavage of NOTCH2 (Saxena et al. 2001, De Strooper et al. 1999), resulting in the release of the intracellular domain of NOTCH2, NICD2, into the cytosol. NICD2 traffics to the nucleus where it acts as a transcriptional regulator. For a recent review of the cannonical NOTCH signaling, please refer to Kopan and Ilagan 2009, D'Souza et al. 2010, Kovall and Blacklow 2010. CNTN1 (contactin 1), a protein involved in oligodendrocyte maturation (Hu et al. 2003) and MDK (midkine) (Huang et al. 2008, Gungor et al. 2011), which plays an important role in epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition, can also bind NOTCH2 and activate NOTCH2 signaling.<br><br>In the nucleus, NICD2 forms a complex with RBPJ (CBF1, CSL) and MAML (mastermind). The NICD2:RBPJ:MAML complex activates transcription from RBPJ binding promoter elements (RBEs) (Wu et al. 2000). NOTCH2 coactivator complexes directly stimulate transcription of HES1 and HES5 genes (Shimizu et al. 2002), both of which are known NOTCH1 targets. NOTCH2 but not NOTCH1 coactivator complexes, stimulate FCER2 transcription. Overexpression of FCER2 (CD23A) is a hallmark of B-cell chronic lymphocytic leukemia (B-CLL) and correlates with the malfunction of apoptosis, which is thought be an underlying mechanism of B-CLL development (Hubmann et al. 2002). NOTCH2 coactivator complexes together with CREBP1 and EP300 stimulate transcription of GZMB (granzyme B), which is important for the cytotoxic function of CD8+ T cells (Maekawa et al. 2008).<br><br>NOTCH2 gene expression is differentially regulated during human B-cell development, with NOTCH2 transcripts appearing at late developmental stages (Bertrand et al. 2000).<br><br> NOTCH2 mutations are a rare cause of Alagille syndrome (AGS). AGS is a dominant congenital multisystem disorder characterized mainly by hepatic bile duct abnormalities. Craniofacial, heart and kidney abnormalities are also frequently observed in the Alagille spectrum (Alagille et al. 1975). AGS is predominantly caused by mutations in JAG1, a NOTCH2 ligand (Oda et al. 1997, Li et al. 1997), but it can also be caused by mutations in NOTCH2 (McDaniell et al. 2006).<br><br><br>Hajdu-Cheney syndrome, an autosomal dominant disorder characterized by severe and progressive bone loss, is caused by NOTCH2 mutations that result in premature C-terminal NOTCH2 truncation, probably leading to increased NOTCH2 signaling (Simpson et al. 2011, Isidor et al. 2011, Majewski et al. 2011). 
R-HSA-1980148	Signaling by NOTCH3	Similar to NOTCH1, NOTCH3 is activated by delta-like and jagged ligands (DLL/JAG) expressed in trans on a neighboring cell. The activation triggers cleavage of NOTCH3, first by ADAM10 at the S2 cleavage site, then by gamma-secretase at the S3 cleavage site, resulting in the release of the intracellular domain of NOTCH3, NICD3, into the cytosol. NICD3 subsequently traffics to the nucleus where it acts as a transcriptional regulator.
R-HSA-1980150	Signaling by NOTCH4	Similar to NOTCH1, NOTCH4 is activated by delta-like and jagged ligands (DLL/JAG) expressed in trans on a neighboring cell. The activation triggers cleavage of NOTCH4, first by ADAM10 at the S2 cleavage site, then by gamma-secretase at the S3 cleavage site, resulting in the release of the intracellular domain of NOTCH4, NICD4, into the cytosol. NICD4 subsequently traffics to the nucleus where it acts as a transcriptional regulator.
R-HSA-5638302	Signaling by Overexpressed Wild-Type EGFR in Cancer	Signaling by EGFR is frequently activated in cancer through genomic amplification of the EGFR locus, resulting in over-expression of the wild-type protein (Wong et al. 1987).
R-HSA-186797	Signaling by PDGF	Platelet-derived Growth Factor (PDGF) is a potent stimulator of growth and motility of connective tissue cells such as fibroblasts and smooth muscle cells as well as other cells such as capillary endothelial cells and neurons.The PDGF family of growth factors is composed of four different polypeptide chains encoded by four different genes. The classical PDGF chains, PDGF-A and PDGF-B, and more recently discovered PDGF-C and PDGF-D. The four PDGF chains assemble into disulphide-bonded dimers via homo- or heterodimerization, and five different dimeric isoforms have been described so far; PDGF-AA, PDGF-AB, PDGF-BB, PDGF-CC and PDGF-DD. It is notable that no heterodimers involving PDGF-C and PDGF-D chains have been described. PDGF exerts its effects by binding to, and activating, two protein tyrosine kinase (PTK) receptors, alpha and beta. These receptors dimerize and undergo autophosphorylation. The phosphorylation sites then attract downstream effectors to transduct the signal into the cell.
R-HSA-5362517	Signaling by Retinoic Acid	Vitamin A (retinol) can be metabolised into active retinoid metabolites that function either as a chromophore in vision or in regulating gene expression transcriptionally and post-transcriptionally. Genes regulated by retinoids are essential for reproduction, embryonic development, growth, and multiple processes in the adult, including energy balance, neurogenesis, and the immune response. The retinoid used as a cofactor in the visual cycle is 11-cis-retinal (11cRAL). The non-visual cycle effects of retinol are mediated by retinoic acid (RA), generated by two-step conversion from retinol (Napoli 2012). All-trans-retinoic acid (atRA) is the major activated metabolite of retinol. An isomer, 9-cis-retinoic acid (9cRA) has biological activity, but has not been detected in vivo, except in the pancreas. An alternative route involves BCO1 cleavage of carotenoids into retinal, which is then reduced into retinol in the intestine (Harrison 2012). The two isomers of RA serve as ligands for retinoic acid receptors (RAR) that regulate gene expression. (Das et al. 2014). RA is catabolised to oxidised metabolites such as 4-hydroxy-, 18-hydroxy- or 4-oxo-RA by CYP family enzymes, these metabolites then becoming substrates for Phase II conjugation enzymes (Ross & Zolfaghari 2011).
R-HSA-194315	Signaling by Rho GTPases	The Rho family of small guanine nucleotide binding proteins is one of five generally recognized branches of the Ras superfamily. Like most Ras superfamily members, typical Rho proteins function as binary switches controlling a variety of biological processes. They perform this function by cycling between active GTP-bound and inactive GDP-bound conformations. Mammalian Rho GTPases include RhoA, RhoB and RhoC (Rho proteins), Rac1 3 (Rac proteins), Cdc42, TC10, TCL, Wrch1, Chp/Wrch2, RhoD and RhoG, to name some. The family also includes RhoH and Rnd1-3, which lack GTPase activity and are predicted to exist in a constitutively active state.<p>Members of the Rho family have been identified in all eukaryotes. Including the atypical RHOBTB1-3 and RHOT1-2 proteins, 24 Rho family members have been identified in mammals (Jaffe and Hall, 2005; Bernards, 2005; Ridley, 2006). Among Rho GTPases, RhoA, Rac1 and Cdc42 have been most extensively studied. These proteins are best known for their ability to induce dynamic rearrangements of the plasma membrane-associated actin cytoskeleton (Aspenstrom et al, 2004; Murphy et al, 1999; Govek et al, 2005). Beyond this function, Rho GTPases also regulate actomyosin contractility and microtubule dynamics. Rho mediated effects on transcription and membrane trafficking are believed to be secondary to these functions. At the more macroscopic level, Rho GTPases have been implicated in many important cell biological processes, including cell growth control, cytokinesis, cell motility, cell cell and cell extracellular matrix adhesion, cell transformation and invasion, and development (Govek et al., 2005). The illustration below lists Rho GTPase effectors implicated in actin and microtubule dynamics (courtesy: Govek et al., 2005, Genes and Development, CSHL Press). Detailed annotations of various biological processes regulated by Rho GTPases will be available in future releases.
R-HSA-376176	Signaling by Robo receptor	The Roundabout (Robo) family encodes transmembrane receptors that regulate axonal guidance and cell migration. The major function of the Robo receptors is to mediate repulsion of the navigating growth cones. There are four human Robo homologues, Robo1, Robo2, Robo3 and Robo4. Most of the Robos have the similar ectodomain architecture as the cell adhesion molecules, five Ig domains followed by three FN3 repeats except for Robo4, it has 2Ig and 2FN3 repeats. The cytoplasmic domains of Robo receptors are in general poorly conserved. However, there are four short conserved cytoplasmic sequence motifs, named CC0-3, that serve as binding sites for adaptor proteins. The ligands for the human Robo receptors are the three Slit proteins Slit1, Slit2, and Slit3; all of the Slit proteins contain a tandem of four LRR (leucine rich repeat) domains at N terminus, termed D1 D4 followed by six EGF (epidermal growth factor)-like domains, a laminin G like domain (ALPS), three EGF-like domains, and a C-terminal cysteine knot domain. Most Slit proteins are cleaved within the EGF-like region by unknown proteases.<br><br>Slit protein binding modulates Robo interactions with the cytosolic adaptors. The cytoplasmic domain of Robo1 and Robo2 determines the repulsive responses of these receptors. Based on the studies from both invertebrate and vertebrate organisms its been inferred that Robo induces growth cone repulsion by controlling cytoskeletal dynamics via either Abelson kinase (Abl) and Enabled (Ena), or Rac activity.<br>
R-HSA-1433557	Signaling by SCF-KIT	Stem cell factor (SCF) is a growth factor with membrane bound and soluble forms. It is expressed by fibroblasts and endothelial cells throughout the body, promoting proliferation, migration, survival and differentiation of hematopoetic progenitors, melanocytes and germ cells.(Linnekin 1999, Ronnstrand 2004, Lennartsson and Ronnstrand 2006). The receptor for SCF is KIT, a tyrosine kinase receptor (RTK) closely related to the receptors for platelet derived growth factor receptor, colony stimulating factor 1 (Linnekin 1999) and Flt3 (Rosnet et al. 1991). Four isoforms of c-Kit have been identified in humans. Alternative splicing results in isoforms of KIT differing in the presence or absence of four residues (GNNK) in the extracellular region. This occurs due to the use of an alternate 5' splice donor site. These GNNK+ and GNNK- variants are co-expressed in most tissues; the GNNK- form predominates and was more strongly tyrosine-phosphorylated and more rapidly internalized (Ronnstrand 2004). There are also splice variants that arise from alternative usage of splice acceptor site resulting in the presence or absence of a serine residue (Crosier et al., 1993). Finally, there is an alternative shorter transcript of KIT expressed in postmeiotic germ cells in the testis which encodes a truncated KIT consisting only of the second part of the kinase domain and thus lackig the extracellular and transmembrane domains as well as the first part of the kinase domain (Rossi et al. 1991). Binding of SCF homodimers to KIT results in KIT homodimerization followed by activation of its intrinsic tyrosine kinase activity. KIT stimulation activates a wide array of signalling pathways including MAPK, PI3K and JAK/STAT (Reber et al. 2006, Ronnstrand 2004). Defects of KIT in humans are associated with different genetic diseases and also in several types of cancers like mast cell leukaemia, germ cell tumours, certain subtypes of malignant melanoma and gastrointestinal tumours.
R-HSA-170834	Signaling by TGF-beta Receptor Complex	The TGF-beta/BMP pathway incorporates several signaling pathways that share most, but not all, components of a central signal transduction engine. The general signaling scheme is rather simple: upon binding of a ligand, an activated plasma membrane receptor complex is formed, which passes on the signal towards the nucleus through a phosphorylated receptor SMAD (R-SMAD). In the nucleus, the activated R-SMAD promotes transcription in complex with a closely related helper molecule termed Co-SMAD (SMAD4). However, this simple linear pathway expands into a network when various regulatory components and mechanisms are taken into account. The signaling pathway includes a great variety of different TGF-beta/BMP superfamily ligands and receptors, several types of the R-SMADs, and functionally critical negative feedback loops. The R-SMAD:Co-SMAD complex can interact with a great number of transcriptional co-activators/co-repressors to regulate positively or negatively effector genes, so that the interpretation of a signal depends on the cell-type and cross talk with other signaling pathways such as Notch, MAPK and Wnt. The pathway plays a number of different biological roles in the control of embryonic and adult cell proliferation and differentiation, and it is implicated in a great number of human diseases.<br>TGF beta (TGFB1) is secreted as a homodimer, and as such it binds to TGF beta receptor II (TGFBR2), inducing its dimerization. Binding of TGF beta enables TGFBR2 to form a stable hetero-tetrameric complex with TGF beta receptor I homodimer (TGFBR1). TGFBR2 acts as a serine/threonine kinase and phosphorylates serine and threonine residues within the short GS domain (glycine-serine rich domain) of TGFBR1.<br>The phosphorylated heterotetrameric TGF beta receptor complex (TGFBR) internalizes into clathrin coated endocytic vesicles where it associates with the endosomal membrane protein SARA. SARA facilitates the recruitment of cytosolic SMAD2 and SMAD3, which act as R-SMADs for TGF beta receptor complex. TGFBR1 phosphorylates recruited SMAD2 and SMAD3, inducing a conformational change that promotes formation of R-SMAD trimers and dissociation of R-SMADs from the TGF beta receptor complex. <br>In the cytosol, phosphorylated SMAD2 and SMAD3 associate with SMAD4 (known as Co-SMAD), forming a heterotrimer which is more stable than the R-SMAD homotrimers. R-SMAD:Co-SMAD heterotrimer translocates to the nucleus where it directly binds DNA and, in cooperation with other transcription factors, regulates expression of genes involved in cell differentiation, in a context-dependent manner. <br>The intracellular level of SMAD2 and SMAD3 is regulated by SMURF ubiquitin ligases, which target R-SMADs for degradation. In addition, nuclear R-SMAD:Co-SMAD heterotrimer stimulates transcription of inhibitory SMADs (I-SMADs), forming a negative feedback loop. I-SMADs bind the phosphorylated TGF beta receptor complexes on caveolin coated vesicles, derived from the lipid rafts, and recruit SMURF ubiquitin ligases to TGF beta receptors, leading to ubiquitination and degradation of TGFBR1. Nuclear R-SMAD:Co-SMAD heterotrimers are targets of nuclear ubiquitin ligases which ubiquitinate SMAD2/3 and SMAD4, causing heterotrimer dissociation, translocation of ubiquitinated SMADs to the cytosol and their proteasome-mediated degradation. For a recent review of TGF-beta receptor signaling, please refer to Kang et al. 2009.
R-HSA-3304351	Signaling by TGF-beta Receptor Complex in Cancer	Signaling by the TGF-beta receptor complex is tumor suppressive, as it inhibits cell growth and promotes cell differentiation and apoptosis (Shipley et al. 1986, Hannon et al. 1994, Datto et al. 1995, Chen et al. 2002, Azar et al. 2009). TGF-beta signaling is frequently impaired in cancer, mostly through SMAD4 gene deletion or loss-of-function mutations, which are especially frequent in pancreatic cancer (Hahn et al. 1996, Shi et al. 1997, Fleming et al. 2013). Signaling by TGF-beta receptor complex can also be disrupted by loss-of-function mutations in SMAD2 and SMAD3 (Fleming et al. 2013) or loss-of-function mutations in TGFBR2 (TGF-beta receptor II) (Markowitz et al. 1995, Garrigue-Antar et al. 1995, Parsons et al. 1995, Grady et al. 1999) or TGFBR1 (TGF-beta receptor I) (Chen et al. 1998, Chen et al. 2001, Goudie et al. 2011).<br><br>In advanced cancer, signaling by TGF-beta may be tumor promoting, as it induces epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT), thereby increasing invasiveness (Cui et al. 1996, Guasch et al. 2007, reviewed by Heldin et al. 2012).
R-HSA-983705	Signaling by the B Cell Receptor (BCR)	Mature B cells express IgM and IgD immunoglobulins which are complexed at the plasma membrane with Ig-alpha (CD79A, MB-1) and Ig-beta (CD79B, B29) to form the B cell receptor (BCR) (Fu et al. 1974, Fu et al. 1975, Kunkel et al. 1975, Van Noesel et al. 1992, Sanchez et al. 1993, reviewed in Brezski and Monroe 2008). Binding of antigen to the immunoglobulin activates phosphorylation of immunoreceptor tyrosine-based activation motifs (ITAMs) in the cytoplasmic tails of Ig-alpha and Ig-beta by Src family tyrosine kinases, including LYN, FYN, and BLK (Nel et al. 1984, Yamanashi et al. 1991, Flaswinkel and Reth 1994, Saouaf et al. 1994, Hata et al. 1994, Saouaf et al. 1995, reviewed in Gauld and Cambier 2004, reviewed in Harwood and Batista 2010).<br>The protein kinase SYK binds the phosphorylated immunoreceptor tyrosine-activated motifs (ITAMs) on the cytoplasmic tails of Ig-alpha (CD79A, MB-1) and Ig-beta (CD79B, B29) (Wienands et al. 1995, Rowley et al. 1995, Tsang et al. 2008). The binding causes the activation and autophosphorylation of SYK (Law et al. 1994, Baldock et al. 2000, Irish et al. 2006, Tsang et al. 2008, reviewed in Bradshaw 2010).<br>Activated SYK and other kinases phosphorylate BLNK (SLP-65), BCAP, and CD19 which serve as scaffolds for the assembly of large complexes, the signalosomes, by recruiting phosphoinositol 3-kinase (PI3K), phospholipase C gamma (predominantly PLC-gamma2 in B cells, Coggeshall et al. 1992), NCK, BAM32, BTK, VAV1, and SHC. The effectors are phosphorylated by SYK and other kinases.<br>PLC-gamma associated with BLNK hydrolyzes phosphatidylinositol-4,5-bisphosphate to yield inositol-1,4,5-trisphosphate (IP3) and diacylglycerol (Carter et al. 1991, Kim et al. 2004). IP3 binds receptors on the endoplasmic reticulum and causes release of calcium ions from the ER into the cytosol. The depletion of calcium from the ER in turn activates STIM1 to interact with ORAI and TRPC1 channels in the plasma membrane, resulting in an influx of extracellular calcium ions (Muik et al. 2008, Luik et al. 2008, Park et al. 2009, Mori et al. 2002). PI3K associated with BCAP and CD19 phosphorylates phosphatidylinositol 4,5-bisphosphate to yield phosphatidyinositol 3,4,5-trisphosphate.<br>Second messengers (calcium, diacylglycerol, inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate, and phosphatidylinositol 3,4,5-trisphosphate) trigger signaling pathways: NF-kappaB is activated via protein kinase C beta, RAS is activated via RasGRP proteins, NF-AT is activated via calcineurin, and AKT (PKB) is activated via PDK1 (reviewed in Shinohara and Kurosaki 2009, Stone 2006).
R-HSA-2404192	Signaling by Type 1 Insulin-like Growth Factor 1 Receptor (IGF1R)	Binding of IGF1 (IGF-I) or IGF2 (IGF-II) to the extracellular alpha peptides of the type 1 insulin-like growth factor receptor (IGF1R) triggers the activation of two major signaling pathways: the SOS-RAS-RAF-MAPK (ERK) pathway and the PI3K-PKB (AKT) pathway (recently reviewed in Pavelic et al. 2007, Chitnis et al. 2008, Maki et al. 2010, Parella et al. 2010, Annunziata et al. 2011, Siddle et al. 2012, Holzenberger 2012).
R-HSA-194138	Signaling by VEGF	In normal development vascular endothelial growth factors (VEGFs) are crucial regulators of vascular development during embryogenesis (vasculogenesis) and blood-vessel formation in the adult (angiogenesis). In tumor progression, activation of VEGF pathways promotes tumor vascularization, facilitating tumor growth and metastasis. Abnormal VEGF function is also associated with inflammatory diseases including atherosclerosis, and hyperthyroidism. The members of the VEGF and VEGF-receptor protein families have distinct but overlapping ligand-receptor specificities, cell-type expression, and function. VEGF-receptor activation in turn regulates a network of signaling processes in the body that promote endothelial cell growth, migration and survival (Hicklin and Ellis, 2005; Shibuya and Claesson-Welsh, 2006).<br>Molecular features of the VGF signaling cascades are outlined in the figure below (from Olsson et al. 2006; Nature Publishing Group). Tyrosine residues in the intracellular domains of VEGF receptors 1, 2,and 3 are indicated by dark blue boxes; residues susceptible to phosphorylation are numbered. A circled R indicates that phosphorylation is regulated by cell state (VEGFR2), by ligand binding (VEGFR1), or by heterodimerization (VEGFR3). Specific phosphorylation sites (boxed numbers) bind signaling molecules (dark blue ovals), whose interaction with other cytosolic signaling molecules (light blue ovals) leads to specific cellular (pale blue boxes) and tissue-level (pink boxes) responses in vivo. Signaling cascades whose molecular details are unclear are indicated by dashed arrows. DAG, diacylglycerol; EC, endothelial cell; eNOS, endothelial nitric oxide synthase; FAK, focal adhesion kinase; HPC, hematopoietic progenitor cell; HSP27, heat-shock protein-27; MAPK, mitogen-activated protein kinase; MEK, MAPK and ERK kinase; PI3K, phosphatidylinositol 3' kinase; PKC, protein kinase C; PLCgamma, phospholipase C-gamma; Shb, SH2 and beta-cells; TSAd, T-cell-specific adaptor.<br>In the current release, the first events in these cascades - the interactions between VEGF proteins and their receptors - are annotated. Details of signaling events and their biological outcome, concisely illustrated in the image below, will be available in future versions of this pathway. 
R-HSA-195721	Signaling by Wnt	WNT signaling pathways control a wide range of developmental and adult process in metozoans including cell proliferation, cell fate decisions, cell polarity and stem cell maintenance (reviewed in Saito-Diaz et al, 2013; MacDonald et al, 2009). The pathway is named for the WNT ligands, a large family of secreted cysteine-rich glycoproteins. At least 19 WNT members have been identified in humans and mice with distinct expression patterns during development (reviewed in Willert and Nusse, 2012). These ligands can activate at least three different downstream signaling cascades depending on which receptors they engage. <br> In the so-called 'canonical' WNT signaling pathway, WNT ligands bind one of the 10 human Frizzled (FZD) receptors in conjunction with the LRP5/6 co-receptors to activate a transcriptional cascade that controls processes such as cell fate, proliferation and self-renenwal of stem cells. Engagement of the FZD-LRP receptor by WNT ligand results in the stabilization and translocation of cytosolic beta-catenin to the nucleus where it is a co-activator for LEF (lymphoid enhancer-binding factor)- and TCF (T cell factor) -dependent transcription. In the absence of WNT ligand, cytosolic beta-catenin is phosphorylated by a degradation complex consisting of glycogen synthase kinase 3 (GSK3), casein kinase 1 (CK1), Axin and Adenomatous polyposis coli (APC), and subsequently ubiquitinated and degraded by the 26S proteasome (reviewed in Saito-Diaz et al, 2013; Kimmelman and Xu, 2006). <br> In addition to the beta-catenin-dependent transcriptional response, WNT signaling can also activate distinct non-transcriptional pathways that regulate cell migration and polarity. These beta-catenin-independent 'non-canonical' pathways signal through Frizzled receptors independently of LRP5/6, or occur through the tyrosine kinase receptors ROR and RYK (reviewed in Veeman et al, 2003; James et al, 2009). Non-canonical WNT pathways are best studied in Drosophila where the planar cell polarity (PCP) pathway controls the orientation of wing hairs and eye facets, but are also involved in processes such as convergent extension, neural tube closure, inner ear development and hair orientation in vertebrates and mammals(reviewed in Seifert and Mlodzik, 2007; Simons and Mlodzik, 2008). In the PCP pathway, binding of WNT ligand to the FZD receptor leads to activation of small Rho GTPases and JNK, which regulate the cytoskeleton and coordinate cell migration and polarity (reviewed in Lai et al, 2009; Schlessinger et al, 2009). In some cases, a FZD-WNT interaction increases intracellular calcium concentration and activates CaMK II and PKC; this WNT calcium pathway promotes cell migration and inhibits the canonical beta-catenin dependent transcriptional pathway (reviewed in Kuhl et al, 2000; Kohn and Moon, 2005; Rao et al 2010). Binding of WNT to ROR or RYK receptors also regulates cell migration, apparently through activation of JNK or SRC kinases, respectively, however the details of these pathways remain to be worked out (reviewed in Minami et al, 2010).<br> Although the WNT signaling pathways were originally viewed as discrete, linear pathways controlled by defined subsets of 'canonical' or 'non-canonical' ligands and receptors, the emerging evidence is challenging this notion. Instead, the specificity and the downstream response appear to depend on the particular cellular context and vary with species, tissue and stage of development (reviewed in van Amerongen and Nusse, 2009; Rao et al, 2010).
R-HSA-4791275	Signaling by WNT in cancer	The WNT signaling pathway has been linked with cancer ever since the identification of the first WNT as a gene activated by integration of mouse mammary tumor virus proviral DNA in virally-induced breast tumors (Nusse et al, 1984). The most well known example of aberrant WNT signaling in cancer is in colorectal cancer, where an activating mutation in a WNT pathway component is seen in 90% of sporadic cases. Inappropriate WNT pathway activation has also been implicated in most other solid human cancers but is not always associated with mutations in WNT pathway components (reviewed in Polakis, 2012).<br>Both tumor suppressors and oncogenes have been identified in the so-called canonical WNT pathway, which regulates WNT-dependent transcription by promoting the degradation of beta-catenin in the absence of ligand (reviewed in Polakis, 2012). Loss-of-function mutations in the destruction complex components APC, Axin and AMER1 and gain-of-function mutations in beta-catenin itself cause constitutive signaling and are found in cancers of the intestine, kidney, liver and stomach, among others (Polakis, 1995; Segiditsas and Tomlinson, 2006; Peifer and Polakis, 2000; Laurent-Puig et al, 2001; Liu et al, 2000; Satoh et al, 2000; Major et al, 2007; Ruteshouser et al, 2008). WNTs and WNT pathway components are also frequently over- or under-expressed in various cancers, and these changes are correlated with epigenetic regulation of promoter activity. In some contexts, both the canonical and non-canonical WNT signaling, which governs processes such as cell polarity and morphogenesis, may also contribute to tumor formation by promoting cell migration, invasiveness and metastasis.
R-HSA-166520	Signalling by NGF	Neurotrophins (NGF, BDNF, NT-3, NT-4/5) play pivotal roles in survival, differentiation, and plasticity of neurons in the peripheral and central nervous system. They are produced, and secreted in minute amounts, by a variety of tissues. They signal through two types of receptors: TRK tyrosine kinase receptors (TRKA, TRKB, TRKC), which specifically interact with the different neurotrophins, and p75NTR, which interacts with all neurotrophins. TRK receptors are reported in a variety of tissues in addition to neurons. p75NTRs are also widespread.<br><br><br>Neurotrophins and their receptors are synthesized as several different splice variants, which differ in terms of their biological activities. The nerve growth factor (NGF) was the first growth factor to be identified and has served as a model for studying the mechanisms of action of neurotrophins and growth factors. The mechanisms by which NGF generates diverse cellular responses have been studied extensively in the rat pheochromocytoma cell line PC12. When exposed to NGF, PC12 cells exit the cell cycle and differentiate into sympathetic neuron-like cells. Current data show that signalling by the other neurotrophins is similar to NGF signalling.
R-HSA-198765	Signalling to ERK5	The location of neurotrophin stimulation appears to determine the nature of the transcriptional response through differential uses of individual MAP kinases. The ERK5 pathway has a unique function in retrograde signalling; in contrast, ERK1/2, which mediate nuclear responses following direct cell body stimulation, does not transmit a retrograde signal. Following neurotrophin stimulation of distal axons, phosphorylated TRK receptors are endocytosed and transported to the cell bodies, where MEK5 phosphorylates ERK5, leading to ERK5 nuclear translocation, phosphorylation of transcription factors, and neuronal survival. In contrast, neurotrophin stimulation of the cell bodies causes concurrent activation and nuclear transport of ERK1/2 as well as ERK5. Several distinctive features of the ERK5 pathway might be important for retrograde signalling. The ERK5 cascade does not depend on activation of the G-protein RAS. Instead, this pathway may use other G-proteins such as RAP that are associated with vesicles, or may not require any G-protein intermediate. Another distinctive feature is that the MEK5 isoform, which is expressed in the nervous system, exhibits a punctate staining pattern, suggesting a vesicular localization. ERK5 itself significantly differs from ERK1/2, and its substrate specificity also differs from ERK1/2. For instance, ERK5 directly activates transcription factors, including MEF2, that are not phosphorylated by ERK1/2. Conversely, ERK1/2, but not ERK5, activate transcription factors such as ELK1 and MITF.
R-HSA-187687	Signalling to ERKs	Neurotrophins utilize multiple pathways to activate ERKs (ERK1 and ERK2), a subgroup of the large MAP kinase (MAPK) family, from the plasma membrane. The major signalling pathways to ERKs are via RAS, ocurring from caveolae in the plasma membrane or from clathrin-coated vesicles, and via RAP1, taking place in early endosomes. Whereas RAS activation by NGF is transient, RAP1 activation by NGF is sustained for hours.
R-HSA-187706	Signalling to p38 via RIT and RIN	RIT and RIN are two small guanine nucleotide binding proteins that share more than 50% sequence identity with RAS, including highly conserved core effector domains. Unlike RAS, the C termini of RIT and RIN lack a typical prenylation motif (CAAX, XXCC, or CXC) required for the association of RAS proteins with the plasma membrane. RIT is expressed in all tissues, whereas RIN is neuron-specific. They have similar signalling properties and are activated by NGF through unknown exchange factors. They signal to ERKs and p38 MAP kinase. They mainly lead to p38 activation via the BRAF-MEK kinase cascade.
R-HSA-167044	Signalling to RAS	Signalling through Shc adaptor proteins appears to be identical for both NGF and EGF. It leads to a fast, but transient, MAPK/ERK activation, which is insufficient to explain the prolonged activation of MAPK found in NGF-treated cells.
R-HSA-198745	Signalling to STAT3	Neurotrophin-induced increase in Signal transducer and activator of transcription 3 (STAT3; acute-phase response factor) activation appears to underly several downstream functions of neurotrophin signalling, such as transcription of immediate early genes, proliferation arrest, and neurite outgrowth.
R-HSA-427359	SIRT1 negatively regulates rRNA Expression	Expression of rRNA genes is coupled to the overall metabolism of the cell by the NAD-dependent histone deacetylase SIRT1, a component of the Energy-dependent Nucleolar Silencing Complex (eNoSC) (Murayama et al. 2008, reviewed in Salminen and Kaarniranta 2009, Grummt and Voit 2010). eNoSC comprises Nucleomethylin (NML), SIRT1, and the histone methylase SUV39H1 (Murayama et al. 2008). Deacetylation and methylation of histone H3 in the chromatin of a rRNA gene by eNoSC causes reduced expression of the gene. When glucose is low, NAD is high (NADH is low), activity of SIRT1 is high, and activity of rRNA genes is reduced. It is hypothesized that eNoSC forms on a nucleosome containing dimethylated lysine-9 on histone H3 (H3K9me2) and then eNoSC deacetylates and dimethylates the adjacent nucleosome, thus catalyzing spreading of H3K9me2 throughout the gene.
R-HSA-77588	SLBP Dependent Processing of Replication-Dependent Histone Pre-mRNAs	There are two well-documented trans-acting factors required for histone pre-mRNA processing. These are:<p>1 Stem-loop binding protein (SLBP), also termed hairpin binding protein (HBP). This 32 kDa protein is likely the first protein that binds to the histone pre-mRNA as it is being transcribed. <p>The U7 snRNP. This particle contains the U7 snRNA, the smallest of the snRNAs which varies from 57-70 nts long depending on the species. The 5' end of U7 snRNA binds to a sequence 3' of the stemloop, termed the histone downstream element (HDE). There are a number of proteins found in the U7 snRNP. There are 7 Sm proteins, as are present in the spliceosomal snRNP. Five of these proteins are the same as ones found in the spliceosomal snRNPs and there are 2, Lsm10 and Lsm11 that are unique to U7 snRNP.<p> A third protein joins the U7 snRNP, ZFP100, a large zinc finger protein. ZFP100 interacts with SLBP bound to the histone pre-mRNA and with Lsm11 and likely plays a critical role in recruiting U7 snRNP to the histone pre-mRNA.<p> It should be noted that there must be other trans-acting factors, including the factor that catalyzes the cleavage reaction. The cleavage occurs in the presence of EDTA as does the cleavage reaction in polyadenylation, it is likely that this reaction is catalyzed by a protein. There may well be additional proteins associated with U7 snRNP, and since under some conditions in vitro processing occurs in the absence of SLBP, it is possible that all of the other factors required for processing are associated with the active form of U7 snRNP.
R-HSA-111367	SLBP independent Processing of Histone Pre-mRNAs	This class of mRNAs is expressed from genes that lack introns yet the transcripts end in polyA tails. These tails are formed by a mechanism similar to that for pre-mRNAs containing introns. It is believed that there is a cis-element that replaces the 3' splice site that normally serves to activate polyadenylation of intron containing pre-mRNAs.
R-HSA-5619102	SLC transporter disorders	The solute-carrier gene (SLC) superfamily encodes membrane-bound transporters comprising 55 gene families with at least 362 putatively functional protein-coding genes. The gene products include passive transporters, symporters and antiporters and are located in all cellular and organelle membranes. Curated here is a list of SLCs, where mutations within them can result in disease (Hediger et al. 2013).
R-HSA-425407	SLC-mediated transmembrane transport	Proteins with transporting functions can be roughly classified into 3 categories: ATP-powered pumps, ion channels, and transporters. Pumps utilize the energy released by ATP hydrolysis to power the movement of the substrates across the membrane, against their electrochemical gradient. Channels at the open state can transfer the substrates (ions or water) down their electrochemical gradient, at an extremely high efficiency (up to 108 s-1). Transporters facilitate the movement of a specific substrate either against or following their concentration gradient, at a lower speed (about 102 -104 s-1); as generally believed, conformational change of the transporter protein is involved in the transfer process.<br><br>According to the Human Genome Organization (HUGO) Gene Nomenclature Committee, all human transporters can be grouped into the solute-carrier (SLC) superfamily. Currently, there are 55 SLC families in the superfamily, with a total of at least 362 putatively functional protein-coding genes (Hediger et al, 2004; He et al., 2009). At least 20-25% amino-acid sequence identity is shared by members belonging to the same SLC family. No homology is shared between different SLC families. While the HUGO nomenclature system by definition only includes human genes, the nomenclature system has been informally extended to include rodent species through the use of lower cases letters (e.g., Slc1a1 denotes the rodent ortholog of the human SLC1A1 gene). And it's worthwhile to mention that pumps, channels and aquaporins are not included in SLC superfamily.
R-HSA-111463	SMAC binds to IAPs 	SMAC binds to the XIAP:caspase complexes.
R-HSA-111469	SMAC-mediated apoptotic response	Once released from the mitochondria, SMAC binds to IAP family proteins displacing them from Caspase:IAP complexes liberating the active caspases.
R-HSA-111464	SMAC-mediated dissociation of IAP:caspase complexes 	Smac/DIABLO regulates IAP function. Residues 56-59 of Smac/DIABLO are homologous to the amino-terminal motif that is used by caspase-9 to bind to the BIR3 domain of XIAP. Binding of Smac/DIABLO to XIAP thus displaces caspase-9 from the XIAP:Caspase complex (reviewed in Salvesen et al., 2002).
R-HSA-3315487	SMAD2/3 MH2 Domain Mutants in Cancer	Mutations in the MH2 domain of SMAD2 and SMAD3 affect their ability to form heterotrimers with SMAD4, thereby impairing TGF-beta signaling (Fleming et al. 2013).<br><br>The SMAD2 and SMAD3 MH2 domain residues most frequently targeted by missense mutations are those that are homologous to SMAD4 MH2 domain residues shown to be involved in the formation of SMAD heterotrimers. Asp300 of SMAD2 and Asp258 of SMAD3 correspond to the frequently mutated Asp351 of SMAD4. Pro305 of SMAD2 corresponds to the frequently mutated Pro356 of SMAD4, while Ala354 of SMAD2 corresponds to Ala406 of SMAD4. Arg268 of SMAD3 corresponds to the frequently mutated Arg361 of SMAD4. SMAD2 and SMAD3 MH2 domain mutations have been examined in most detail in colorectal cancer (Fleming et al. 2013).
R-HSA-3304356	SMAD2/3 Phosphorylation Motif Mutants in Cancer	The conserved phosphorylation motif Ser-Ser-X-Ser at the C-terminus of SMAD2 and SMAD3 is subject to disruptive mutations in cancer. The last two serine residues in this conserved motif, namely Ser465 and Ser467 in SMAD2 and Ser423 and Ser425 in SMAD3, are phosphorylated by the activated TGF beta receptor complex (Macias Silva et al. 1996, Nakao et al. 1997). Once phosphorylated, SMAD2 and SMAD3 form transcriptionally active heterotrimers with SMAD4 (Chacko et al. 2001, Chacko et al. 2004). Phosphorylation motif mutants of SMAD2 and SMAD3 cannot be activated by the TGF-beta receptor complex either because serine residues are substituted with amino acid residues that cannot be phosphorylated or because the phosphorylation motif is deleted from the protein sequence or truncated (Fleming et al. 2013).
R-HSA-2173796	SMAD2/SMAD3:SMAD4 heterotrimer regulates transcription	After phosphorylated SMAD2 and/or SMAD3 form a heterotrimer with SMAD4, SMAD2/3:SMAD4 complex translocates to the nucleus (Xu et al. 2000, Kurisaki et al. 2001, Xiao et al. 2003). In the nucleus, linker regions of SMAD2 and SMAD3 within SMAD2/3:SMAD4 complex can be phosphorylated by CDK8 associated with cyclin C (CDK8:CCNC) or CDK9 associated with cyclin T (CDK9:CCNT). CDK8/CDK9-mediated phosphorylation of SMAD2/3 enhances transcriptional activity of SMAD2/3:SMAD4 complex, but also primes it for ubiquitination and consequent degradation (Alarcon et al. 2009). <br><br>The transfer of SMAD2/3:SMAD4 complex to the nucleus can be assisted by other proteins, such as WWTR1. In human embryonic cells, WWTR1 (TAZ) binds SMAD2/3:SMAD4 heterotrimer and mediates TGF-beta-dependent nuclear accumulation of SMAD2/3:SMAD4. The complex of WWTR1 and SMAD2/3:SMAD4 binds promoters of SMAD7 and SERPINE1 (PAI-1 i.e. plasminogen activator inhibitor 1) genes and stimulates their transcription (Varelas et al. 2008). Stimulation of SMAD7 transcription by SMAD2/3:SMAD4 represents a negative feedback loop in TGF-beta receptor signaling. SMAD7 can be downregulated by RNF111 ubiquitin ligase (Arkadia), which binds and ubiquitinates SMAD7, targeting it for degradation (Koinuma et al. 2003). <br><br>SMAD2/3:SMAD4 heterotrimer also binds the complex of RBL1 (p107), E2F4/5 and TFDP1/2 (DP1/2). The resulting complex binds MYC promoter and inhibits MYC transcription. Inhibition of MYC transcription contributes to anti-proliferative effect of TGF-beta (Chen et al. 2002). SMAD2/3:SMAD4 heterotrimer also associates with transcription factor SP1. SMAD2/3:SMAD4:SP1 complex stimulates transcription of a CDK inhibitor CDKN2B (p15-INK4B), also contributing to the anti-proliferative effect of TGF-beta (Feng et al. 2000). <br><br>MEN1 (menin), a transcription factor tumor suppressor mutated in a familial cancer syndrome multiple endocrine neoplasia type 1, forms a complex with SMAD2/3:SMAD4 heterotrimer, but transcriptional targets of SMAD2/3:SMAD4:MEN1 have not been elucidated (Kaji et al. 2001, Sowa et al. 2004, Canaff et al. 2012). <br><br>JUNB is also an established transcriptional target of SMAD2/3:SMAD4 complex (Wong et al. 1999).
R-HSA-3311021	SMAD4 MH2 Domain Mutants in Cancer	The MH2 domain of SMAD4 is the most frequently mutated SMAD4 region in cancer. MH2 domain mutations result in the loss of function of SMAD4 by abrogating the formation of transcriptionally active heterotrimers of SMAD4 and TGF-beta receptor complex-activated R-SMADs - SMAD2 and SMAD3 (Shi et al. 1997, Chacko et al. 2001, Chacko et al. 2004, Fleming et al. 2013).<br><br>The hotspot MH2 domain amino acid residues that are targeted by missense mutations are Asp351 (D351), Pro356 (P356) and Arg361 (R361). These three hotspot residues map to the L1 loop which is conserved in SMAD2 and SMAD3 and is involved in intermolecular interactions that contribute to the formation of SMAD heterotrimers and homotrimers (Shi et al. 1997, Fleming et al. 2013). Other frequently mutated residues in the MH2 domain of SMAD4 - Ala406 (A406), Lys428 (K428) and Arg515 (R515) - are involved in binding the phosphorylation motif (Ser-Ser-X-Ser) of SMAD2 and SMAD3, with Arg515 in the L3 loop being critical for this interaction (Chacko et al. 2001, Chacko et al. 2004, Fleming et al. 2013).
R-HSA-426486	Small interfering RNA (siRNA) biogenesis	Small interfering RNAs (siRNAs) are 21-25 nucleotide single-stranded RNAs produced by cleavage of longer double-stranded RNAs by the enzyme DICER1 within the RISC loading complex containing DICER1, an Argonaute protein, and either TARBP2 or PRKRA (PACT). Typically the long double-stranded substrates originate from viruses or repetitive elements in the genome and the two strands of the substrate are exactly complementary.<br>After cleavage by DICER1 the 21-25 nucleotide double-stranded product is loaded into an Argonuate protein (humans contain 4 Argonautes) and rendered single-stranded by a mechanism that is not well characterized.<br>siRNA-loaded AGO2 is predominantly located at the cytosolic face of the rough endoplasmic reticulum and has also been observed in the nucleus.
R-HSA-445355	Smooth Muscle Contraction	Layers of smooth muscle cells can be found in the walls of numerous organs and tissues within the body. Smooth muscle tissue lacks the striated banding pattern characteristic of skeletal and cardiac muscle. Smooth muscle is triggered to contract by the autonomic nervous system, hormones, autocrine/paracrine agents, local chemical signals, and changes in load or length.<br> Actin:myosin cross bridging is used to develop force with the influx of calcium ions (Ca2+) initiating contraction. Two separate protein pathways, both triggered by calcium influx contribute to contraction, a calmodulin driven kinase pathway, and a caldesmon driven pathway.<br> Recent evidence suggests that actin, myosin, and intermediate filaments may be far more volatile then previously suspected, and that changes in these cytoskeletal elements along with alterations of the focal adhesions that anchor these proteins may contribute to the contractile cycle.<br> Contraction in smooth muscle generally uses a variant of the same sliding filament model found in striated muscle, except in smooth muscle the actin and myosin filaments are anchored to focal adhesions, and dense bodies, spread over the surface of the smooth muscle cell. When actin and myosin move across one another focal adhesions are drawn towards dense bodies, effectively squeezing the cell into a smaller conformation. The sliding is triggered by calcium:caldesmon binding, caldesmon acting in an analogous fashion to troponin in striated muscle. Phosphorylation of myosin light chains also is involved in the initiation of an effective contraction.<br> 
R-HSA-191859	snRNP Assembly	Small nuclear ribonucleoproteins (snRNPs) are crucial for pre-mRNA processing to mRNAs. Each snRNP contains a small nuclear RNA (snRNA) and an extremely stable core of seven Sm proteins. The U6 snRNA differs from the other snRNAs; it binds seven Sm-like proteins and its assembly does not involve a cytoplasmic phase. The snRNP biogenesis pathway for all of the other snRNAs is complex, involving nuclear export of snRNA, Sm-core assembly in the cytoplasm and re-import of the mature snRNP. The assembly of the snRNA:Sm-core is carried out by the survival of motor neurons (SMN) complex. The SMN complex stringently scrutinizes RNAs for specific features that define them as snRNAs and binds the RNA-binding Sm proteins.
R-HSA-427652	Sodium-coupled phosphate cotransporters	Phosphorus is an essential element that is critical for structural and metabolic roles in all living organisms. Cells obtain phosphorus in the form of negatively-charged inorganic phosphate (Pi). Two SLC families transport phosphate in mammals; SLC34 (Murer H et al, 2004) and SLC20 (Collins JF et al, 2004). Both are secondary-active, Na+-coupled transporter systems which use the inward Na+ gradient (from the Na+-K+-ATPase) to drive phosphate influx into cells (Virkki LV et al, 2007).
R-HSA-433137	Sodium-coupled sulphate, di- and tri-carboxylate transporters	Five human SLC13 genes encode sodium-coupled sulphate, di- and tri-carboxylate transporters located on the plasma membrane. Two transporters (NaS1 and NaS2) co-transport sulphate with sodium. The other members (NaDC1, NaDC3, and NaCT) co-transport sodium with di- and tri-carboxylates such as succinate, citrate and alpha-ketoglutarate (Pajor AM, 2006).
R-HSA-425561	Sodium/Calcium exchangers	Calcium ions are used by cells as ubiquitous signalling molecules that control diverse physiological events. Three mammalian gene families control Ca2+ transport across plasma membranes and intracellular compartments (Lytton J, 2007). They are the Na+/Ca2+ exchanger family designated NCX (SLC8) (three members NCX1-3) (Quednau BD et al, 2004), the Na+/Ca2+-K+ exchanger family designated NCKX (SLC24) (five members NCKX1-5) (Schnetkamp PP, 2004) and a Ca2+/cation exchanger (NCKX6, NCLX) whose physiological function remains unclear.
R-HSA-425986	Sodium/Proton exchangers	The SLC9 gene family encode proteins (sodium/proton exchangers, NHE or NHX) which exchange sodium (influx) for protons (efflux) electroneutrally. This mechanism is important because many metabolic processes generate acids which need to be removed to maintain pH. This is the major proton extruding system in cells, driven by the inward sodium ion chemical gradient. To date, there are eleven NHE genes, NHE1-11. NHE1-5 exchange cations at the cell membrane. NHE6-9 exchange cations at endosomal membranes or the trans-golgi network membranes.
R-HSA-112412	SOS-mediated signalling	SOS is recruited to the plasma membrane and mediates activation of Ras.
R-HSA-1300642	Sperm Motility And Taxes	A series of receptor signaling pathways potentially govern chemical communication between sperm and egg, chemotactically guiding incoming sperm towards the oocyte. Though several substances are confirmed as sperm chemoattractant, progesterone (P) seems to be the best chemoattractant candidate for human sperm. Ion channels control the sperm ability to fertilize the egg by regulating sperm maturation in the female reproductive tract and by triggering key sperm physiological responses required for successful fertilization such as hyperactivated motility, chemotaxis, and the acrosome reaction. CatSper, a pH regulated, calcium selective ion channel, potassium channel KSper (Slo3), and Hv1, the voltage gated proton channel are involved in regulation of sperm hyperactivated motility. While progesterone, secreted by ovulated cumulus oophorus, may act as a chemoattractant for sperm cells over the short distances, a major determinant of sperm guidance over long distances in the mammalian female reproductive tract is rheotaxis.
R-HSA-1300652	Sperm:Oocyte Membrane Binding	After the acrosome reactome the sperm has passed through the cumulus cells and the zona pellucida. The membrane of the sperm head and the membrane of the oocyte are drawn together through the interaction of the sperm-bound protein Izumo and the ooctye CD9 membrane protein.
R-HSA-1660661	Sphingolipid de novo biosynthesis	The main steps involved in de novo sphingolipid synthesis are annotated here (Merrill 2002, Gault et al. 2010).
R-HSA-428157	Sphingolipid metabolism	Sphingolipids are derivatives of long chain sphingoid bases such as sphingosine (trans-1,3-dihydroxy 2-amino-4-octadecene), an 18-carbon unsaturated amino alcohol which is the most abundant sphingoid base in mammals. Amide linkage of a fatty acid to sphingosine yields ceramides. Esterification of phosphocholine to ceramides yields sphingomyelin, and ceramide glycosylation yields glycosylceramides. Introduction of sialic acid residues yields gangliosides. These molecules appear to be essential components of cell membranes, and intermediates in the pathways of sphingolipid synthesis and breakdown modulate processes including apoptosis and T cell trafficking.<p>While sphingolipids are abundant in a wide variety of foodstuffs, these dietary molecules are mostly degraded by the intestinal flora and intestinal enzymes. The body primarily depends on de novo synthesis for its sphingolipid supply (Hannun and Obeid 2008; Merrill 2002). De novo synthesis proceeds in four steps: the condensation of palmitoyl-CoA and serine to form 3-ketosphinganine, the reduction of 3-ketosphinganine to sphinganine, the acylation of sphinganine with a long-chain fatty acyl CoA to form dihydroceramide, and the desaturation of dihydroceramide to form ceramide.<p>Other sphingolipids involved in signaling are derived from ceramide and its biosynthetic intermediates. These include sphinganine (dihydrosphingosine) 1-phosphate, phytoceramide, sphingosine, and sphingosine 1-phosphate.<p>Sphingomyelin is synthesized in a single step in the membrane of the Golgi apparatus from ceramides generated in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) membrane and transferred to the Golgi by CERT (ceramide transfer protein), an isoform of COL4A3BP that is associated with the ER membrane as a complex with PPM1L (protein phosphatase 1-like) and VAPA or VAPB (VAMP-associated proteins A or B). Sphingomyelin synthesis appears to be regulated primarily at the level of this transport process through the reversible phosphorylation of CERT (Saito et al. 2008).<br>
R-HSA-1295596	Spry regulation of FGF signaling	Sprouty was initially characterized as a negative regulator of FGFR signaling in Drosophila. Human cells contain four genes encoding Sprouty proteins, of which Spry2 is the best studied and most widely expressed. Spry proteins modulate the duration and extent of signaling through the MAPK cascade after FGF stimulation, although the mechanism appears to depend on the particular biological context. Some studies have suggested that Sprouty binds to GRB2 and interferes with the recruitment of GRB2-SOS1 to the receptor, while others have shown that Sprouty interferes with the MAPK cascade at the level of RAF activation. In addition to modulating the MAPK pathway in response to FGF stimulation, Sprouty itself appears to be subject to complex post-translational modification that regulates its activity and stability.
R-HSA-1799339	SRP-dependent cotranslational protein targeting to membrane	The process for translation of a protein destined for the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) branches from the canonical cytoslic translation process at the point when a nascent polypeptide containing a hydrophobic signal sequence is exposed on the surface of the cytosolic ribosome:mRNA:peptide complex. The signal sequence mediates the interaction of this complex with a cytosolic signal recognition particle (SRP) to form a complex which in turn docks with an SRP receptor complex on the ER membrane. There the ribosome complex is transferred from the SRP complex to a translocon complex embedded in the ER membrane and reoriented so that the nascent polypeptide protrudes through a pore in the translocon into the ER lumen. Translation, which had been halted by SRP binding, now resumes, the signal peptide is cleaved from the polypeptide, and elongation proceeds, with the growing polypeptide oriented into the ER lumen.
R-HSA-69541	Stabilization of p53	Later studies pin-pointed that a single serine (Ser-15) was phosphorylated by ATM and phosphorylation of Ser-15 was rapidly-induced in IR-treated cells and this response was ATM-dependent (Canman et al, 1998; Banin et al, 1998 and Khanna et al, 1998). ATM also regulates the phosphorylation of p53 at other sites, especially Ser-20, by activating other serine/threonine kinases in response to IR (Chehab et al, 2000; Shieh et al, 2000; Hirao et al 2000). Phosphorylation of p53 at Ser-20 interferes with p53-MDM2 interaction. MDM2 is transcriptionally activated by p53 and is a negative regulator of p53 that targets it for degradation (Haupt et al, 1997; Kubbutat et al, 1997). In addition modification of MDM2 by ATM also affects p53 stabilization (Maya et al, 2001). 
R-HSA-3249367	STAT6-mediated induction of chemokines	Signal transducer and activator of transcription 6 (STAT6) may function as a signaling molecule and as a transcription factor. The canonical activation of STAT6 in IL4 and IL13 signaling pathways is mediated by the tyrosine kinases JAK (Hebenstreit D et al. 2006). Virus-induced STAT6 activation was found to be cytokine- and JAK-independent (Chen H et al. 2011). Infection of human cells with RNA or DNA viruses resulted in an interaction of STAT6 with STING. The kinase TBK1 was shown to phosphorylate STAT6, which in turn induced STAT6 dimerization and translocation to the nucleus, leading to induction of chemokines CCL2, CCL20, and CCL26 in IFN-independent manner (Chen H et al. 2011).<p>RNA virus infection triggers STAT6 activation through STING, TBK1 and adaptor protein MAVS interaction (Chen H et al. 2011).
R-HSA-209943	Steroid hormones	Active steroid hormones are produced from the precursor cholesterol.The steps involved in the biosynthesis of the adrenal steroid hormones, corticosterone, cortisol, and aldosterone; and the gonadal steroid hormones, progesterone, estradiol, and testosterone are annotated here. The enzymes that catalyze these reactions fall into two major classes of proteins: the cytochrome P450 heme-containing proteins and the hydroxysteroid dehydrogenases.
R-HSA-211994	Sterols are 12-hydroxylated by CYP8B1	Cytochrome P450 8B1 (CYP8B1, sterol 12-alpha- hydroxylase) has a broad substrate specificity including a number of 7-alpha- hydroxylated C27 steroids. It is also involved in bile acid synthesis and is responsible for the balance between the formation of cholic acid and chenodeoxycholic acid (Gafvels et al. 1999).
R-HSA-211736	Stimulation of the cell death response by PAK-2p34	In response to stress signals, the p21-activated protein kinase PAK-2 stimulates a cell death response characterized by increased cell rounding and apoptotic chromatin condensation (see Jakobi et al., 2003). PAK-2 is proteolytically cleaved by caspase-3 producing a constitutively active fragment, PAK-2p34. Following cleavage, PAK-2p34 is autophosphorylated at Thr 402 and transported to the nucleus where it accumulates due to the loss of its nuclear export signal motif (Jakobi et al., 2003). The activity of PAK-2p34 appears to be regulated both by proteosomal degradation (Jakobi et al., 2003) and by association with the GTPase-activating protein PS-GAP/ RHG-10. This interaction inhibits the kinase activity of PAK-2p34 and changes the localization of PAK-2p34 from the nucleus to the perinuclear region (Koeppel et al., 2004). PAK-2p34 may function in the down-regulation of translation initiation in apoptosis through phosphorylation of Mnk1 (Orton et al.,2004).
R-HSA-2672351	Stimuli-sensing channels	Ion channels that mediate sensations such as pain, warmth, cold, taste pressure and vision. Channels that mediate these sensations include acid-sensing ion channels (ASICs) (Wang & Xu 2011, Qadri et al. 2012, Deval et al. 2010) and the transient receptor potential channels (TRPCs) (Takahashi et al. 2012, Numata et al. 2011 in "TRP Channels" Zhu, MX editor, CRC Press, 2011, Ramsey et al. 2006, Montell 2005). Many channels are sensitive to changes in calcium (Ca2+) levels, both inside and outside the cell. Examples are protein tweety homologs 2 and 3 (TTYH2, 3) (Suzuki 2006), bestrophins 1-4 (BEST1-4) (Sun et al. 2002, Tsunenari et al. 2003, Kunzelmann et al. 2009, Hartzell et al. 2008) and ryanodine receptor tetramers (RYRs) (Beard et al. 2009).
R-HSA-1834941	STING mediated induction of host immune responses	STING (stimulator of IFN genes; also known as MITA/ERIS/MPYS/TMEM173) is an endoplasmic reticulum (ER) resident, which is required for effective type I IFN production in response to nucleic acids. Indeed, select pathogen-derived DNA or RNA were shown to activate STING in human and mouse cells (Ishikawa H and Barber GN 2008; Ishikawa H et al. 2009; Sun W et al. 2009; Prantner D et al. 2010). Importantly, in vitro studies have shown that STING is essential for Mycobacterium tuberculosis (Manzanillo PS et al. 2012), Plasmodium falciparum (Sharma S et al. 2011) and human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) induced type I IFN production [Yan N et al 2010]. Mycobacterium tuberculosis, plasmodium falciparum and HIV are three deadliest pathogens, which kill millions of people each year worldwide.<p>STING has been also implicated in type I IFN response which was stimulated by fusion of viral and target-cell membrane in a manner independent of DNA, RNA and viral capsid [Holm CK et al 2012].<p>Under steady state conditions, STING is positioned at the translocon complex within the ER membrane. However upon stimulation with intracellular DNA it translocates from ER to perinuclear vesicles via the Golgi by mechanisms that remain unclear (Ishikawa H and Barber GN 2008; Sun W et al. 2009; Ishikawa H et al. 2009; Saitoh T et al. 2009). Mouse Sting trafficking in dsDNA-stimulated mouse embryonic fibroblasts (MEF) cells was found to depend on autophagy-related gene 9a (Atg9a) (Saitoh T et al. 2009).<p>STING was reported to function as a signaling adaptor or coreceptor in response to cytosolic dsDNA (Unterholzner L et al. 2010; Zhang Z et al. 2011). STING was also shown to function as a direct DNA sensor to induce the innate immune response in human telomerase fibroblasts (hTERT-BJ1) and murine embryonic fibroblasts (MEFs) (Abe T et al. 2013). Additionally, STING is thought to function as a direct sensor of cyclic dinucleotides. STING was shown to interact directly with c-di-GMP in human embryonic kidney HEK293T cell lysates (Burdette DL et al. 2011). Once STING is stimulated, its C-terminus serves as a signaling scaffold to recruit IRF3 and TBK1, which leads to TBK1-dependent phosphorylation of IRF3 (Tanaka Y and Chen ZJ 2012).<p>Mouse, but not human STING, can also bind vascular disrupting agents 5,6-dimethylxanthenone-4-acetic acid (DMXAA) and the antiviral small molecule 10-carboxymethyl-9-acridanone (CMA) to induce type I IFN production, suggesting a species-specific drug effect on the STING-mediated host response (Conlon J et al. 2013; Cavlar T et al. 2013).
R-HSA-390522	Striated Muscle Contraction	Striated muscle contraction is a process whereby force is generated within striated muscle tissue, resulting in a change in muscle geometry, or in short, increased force being exerted on the tendons. Force generation involves a chemo-mechanical energy conversion step that is carried out by the actin/myosin complex activity, which generates force through ATP hydrolysis. Striated muscle is a type of muscle composed of myofibrils, containing repeating units called sarcomeres, in which the contractile myofibrils are arranged in parallel to the axis of the cell, resulting in transverse or oblique striations observable at the level of the light microscope.<br>Here striated muscle contraction is represented on the basis of calcium binding to the troponin complex, which exposes the active sites of actin. Once the active sites of actin are exposed, the myosin complex bound to ADP can bind actin and the myosin head can pivot, pulling the thin actin and thick myosin filaments past one another. Once the myosin head pivots, ADP is ejected, a fresh ATP can be bound and the energy from the hydrolysis of ATP to ADP is channeled into kinetic energy by resetting the myosin head. With repeated rounds of this cycle the sarcomere containing the thin and thick filaments effectively shortens, forming the basis of muscle contraction.
R-HSA-1614517	Sulfide oxidation to sulfate	While the human body is very economical with sulfur amino acids (SAA), superfluous SAA are degraded via cysteine to toxic hydrogen sulfide which must be dealt with. The pathway to oxidize this gas is localized to mitochondria and is highly conserved, pointing back to a time when life was immersed in sulfide-rich waters.<br>The pathway for sulfide oxidation consists of five reactions, one of which, the sulfur transfer from thiosulfate to glutathione, is still to be characterized fully. A mutation in one enzyme has been identified that is associated with ethylmalonyl encephalopathy and where tissue sulfide is elevated (Stipanuk & Ueki 2011).
R-HSA-1614635	Sulfur amino acid metabolism	The main sulfur amino acids are methionine, cysteine, homocysteine and taurine. Of these, the first two are proteinogenic.<br><br>This group of reactions contains all processes that 1) break down sulfur amino acids, 2) interconvert between them, and 3) synthesize them from solved sulfide which comes from sulfate assimilation and reduction. Only plants and microorganisms employ all processes. Humans cannot de novo synthesize any sulfur amino acid, nor convert cysteine to methionine (Brosnan & Brosnan, 2006).
R-HSA-3108232	SUMO E3 ligases SUMOylate target proteins	SUMO proteins are conjugated to lysine residues of target proteins via an isopeptide bond with the C-terminal glycine of SUMO (reviewed in Zhao 2007, Gareau and Lima 2010, Hannoun et al. 2010, Citro and Chiocca 2013, Yang and Chiang 2013). Proteomic analyses indicate that SUMO is conjugated to hundreds of proteins and most targets of SUMOylation are nuclear (Vertegal et al. 2006, Bruderer et al. 2011, Tatham et al. 2011, Da Silva et al. 2012, Becker et al. 2013).<br>UBE2I (UBC9), the E2 activating enzyme of the SUMO pathway, is itself also a SUMO E3 ligase. Most SUMOylation reactions will proceed with only the substrate protein and the UBE2I:SUMO thioester conjugate. The rates of some reactions are further enhanced by the action of other E3 ligases such as RANBP2. These E3 ligases catalyze SUMO transfer to substrate by one of two basic mechanisms: they interact with both the substrate and UBE2I:SUMO thus bringing them into proximity or they enhance the release of SUMO from UBE2I to the substrate.<br>Most SUMOylation reactions occur in the nucleoplasm therefore most targets of SUMOylation are nuclear proteins such as transcription factors, transcription cofactors, and nuclear receptors. In the cell SUMO1 is mainly concentrated at the nuclear membrane and in nuclear bodies. Most SUMO1 is conjugated to RANGAP1 near the nuclear pore. SUMO2 is at least partially cytosolic and SUMO3 is located mainly in nuclear bodies. Most SUMO2 and SUMO3 is unconjugated in unstressed cells and becomes conjugated to target proteins in response to stress (Golebiowski et al. 2009). Especially notable is the requirement for recruitment of SUMO to sites of DNA damage where conjugation to targets seems to coordinate the repair process (Flotho and Melchior 2013).<br>Several effects of SUMOylation have been described: steric interference with protein-protein interactions, interference with other post-translational modifications such as ubiquitinylation and phosphorylation, and recruitment of proteins that possess a SUMO-interacting motif (SIM) (reviewed in Zhao 2007, Flotho and Melchior 2013, Jentsch and Psakhye 2013, Yang and Chiang 2013). In most cases SUMOylation inhibits the activity of the target protein.<br>The SUMOylation reactions included in this module have met two criteria: They have been verified by assays of individual proteins (as opposed to mass proteomic assays) and the effect of SUMOylation on the function of the target protein has been tested.
R-HSA-3065676	SUMO is conjugated to E1 (UBA2:SAE1)	The UBA2:SAE1 complex catalyzes the formation of a thioester linkage between the C-terminal glycine of the mature SUMO and a cysteine residue (cysteine-173) in UBA2 (SAE2) (reviewed in Wang and Dasso 2009, Wilkinson and Henley 2010, Hannoun et al. 2010, Gareau and Lima 2010). During the process the C-terminal glycine residue of SUMO is reacted with ATP to yield pyrophosphate and a transient intermediate, SUMO adenylate. The SUMO adenylate then reacts with the thiol group of the cysteine residue of UBA2 (Olsen et al. 2010).
R-HSA-3065679	SUMO is proteolytically processed	SUMO1, 2, and 3 are initially expressed as propeptides containing extra residues at the C-terminus. (SUMO1 has 4 residues, SUMO2 has 2 residues, and SUMO3 has 11 residues,) SENP1, 2, and 5 are endoproteases that process the precursors to produce the mature peptides (reviewed in Wang and Dasso 2009, Wilkinson and Henley 2010, Hannoun et al. 2010, Gareau and Lima 2010). SENP1 processes SUMO1 with greater efficiency than SUMO2 or SUMO3. SENP2 and SENP5 process SUMO2 with greater efficiency than SUMO1 or SUMO3 (Gong and Yeh 2006, Mikolajczyk et al. 2007). SENP1 shuttles between the cytosol and nuceoplasm and is predominantly nuclear (Bailey and O'hare 2004, Kim et al. 2005). SENP2 also shuttles (Itahana et al. 2006) and is mainly located on nucleoplasmic filaments of the nuclear pore complex (Hang and Dasso 2002, Zhang et al. 2002). SENP5 is located mostly in the nucleolus (Di Bacco et al. 2006, Gong and Yeh 2006).
R-HSA-3065678	SUMO is transferred from E1 to E2 (UBE2I, UBC9)	SUMO is transferred from cysteine-173 of UBA2 to cysteine-93 of UBC9 (UBE2I) in a transthiolation reaction (reviewed in Wang and Dasso 2009, Wilkinson and Henley 2010, Hannoun et al. 2010, Gareau and Lima 2010). UBC9 is the only known E2 enzyme for SUMO and on certain substrates such as RanGAP1 may act without the requirement of an E3 ligase.
R-HSA-2990846	SUMOylation	Small Ubiquitin-like MOdifiers (SUMOs) are a family of 3 proteins (SUMO1,2,3) that are reversibly conjugated to lysine residues of target proteins via a glycine-lysine isopeptide bond (reviewed in Hay 2013, Hannoun et al. 2010, Gareau and Lima 2010, Wilkinson and Henley 2010, Wang and Dasso 2009). Proteomic methods have yielded estimates of hundreds of target proteins. Targets are mostly located in the nucleus and therefore SUMOylation disproportionately affects gene expression.<br>SUMOs are initially translated as proproteins possessing extra amino acid residues at the C-terminus which are removed by the SUMO processing endoproteases SENP1,2,5 (Hay 2007). Different SENPs have significantly different efficiencies with different SUMOs. The processing exposes a glycine residue at the C-terminus that is activated by ATP-dependent thiolation at cysteine-173 of UBA2 in a complex with SAE1, the E1 complex. The SUMO is transferred from E1 to cysteine-93 of a single E2 enzyme, UBC9 (UBE2I). UBC9 with or, in some cases, without an E3 ligase conjugates the glycine C-terminus of SUMO to an epsilon amino group of a lysine residue on the target protein. SUMO2 and SUMO3 may then be further polymerized, forming chains. SUMO1 is unable to form polymers.<br> Conjugated SUMO can act as a biinding site for proteins possessing SUMO interaction motifs (SIMs) and can also directly affect the formation of complexes between the target protein and other proteins.<br>Conjugated SUMOs are removed by cleavage of the isopeptide bond by processing enzymes SENP1,2,3,5. The processing enzymes SENP6 and SENP7 edit chains of SUMO2 and SUMO3.
R-HSA-3108214	SUMOylation of DNA damage response and repair proteins	Several factors that participate in DNA damage response and repair are SUMOylated (reviewed in Dou et al. 2011, Bekker-Jensen and Mailand 2011, Ulrich 2012, Psakhye and Jentsch 2012, Bologna and Ferrari 2013, Flotho and Melchior 2013, Jackson and Durocher 2013). SUMOylation can alter enzymatic activity and protein stability or it can serve to recruit additional factors. For example, SUMOylation of Thymine DNA glycosylase (TDG) causes TDG to lose affinity for its product, an abasic site opposite a G residue, and thus increases turnover of the enzyme. During repair of double-strand breaks SUMO1, SUMO2, SUMO3, and the SUMO E3 ligases PIAS1 and PIAS4 accumulate at double-strand breaks where BRCA1, HERC1, RNF168, MDC1, and TP53BP1 are SUMOylated. SUMOylation of BRCA1 may increase its ubiquitin ligase activity while SUMOylation of MDC1 and HERC2 appears to play a role in recruitment of proteins such as RNF4 and RNF8 to double strand breaks. Similarly SUMOylation of RPA1 (RPA70) recruits RAD51 in the homologous recombination pathway.
R-HSA-5683826	Surfactant metabolism	The alveolar region of the lung creates an extensive epithelial surface that mediates the transfer of oxygen and carbon dioxide required for respiration after birth. Type I epithelial cells form the alveolar surface and mediate gaseous exchange. Type II epithelial cells secrete pulmonary surfactant, a lipoprotein complex that forms a thin interfacial film, lowering surface tension at the air-liquid interface in alveoli and maintaining the structural integrity of alveoli, preventing their collapse at low volumes. Surfactant production is increased prior to birth, in preparation for air breathing at birth (Hallman 2013). Pre-term infants, where type II epithelial cells are not fully differentiated yet, can produce insufficient surfactant and result in respiratory distress syndrome. Surfactant is composed primarily of phospholipids enriched in phosphatidylcholine (PC) and phosphatidylglycerol (PG) (Agassandian & Mallampalli 2013) and the pulmonary collectins, termed surfactant proteins A, B, C and D (SFTPA-D). They influence surfactant homeostasis, contributing to the physical structures of lipids in the alveoli and to the regulation of surfactant function and metabolism. They are directly secreted from alveolar type II cells into the airway to function as part of the surfactant. SFTPA and D are large, hydrophilic proteins while SFTPB and C are small, very hydrophobic proteins (Johansson et al. 1994). In addition to their surfactant functions, SFTPA and D play important roles in innate host defense by binding and clearing invading microbes from the lung (Kingma & Whitsett 2006). Nuclear regulation, transport, metabolism, reutilisation and degradation of surfactant are described here (Ikegami 2006, Boggaram 2009, Whitsett et al. 2010). Mutations in genes involved in these processes can result in respiratory distress syndrome, lung proteinosis, interstitial lung diseases and chronic lung diseases (Perez-Gil & Weaver 2010, Whitsett et al. 2010, Akella & Deshpande 2013, Jo 2014).
R-HSA-3000170	Syndecan interactions	Syndecans are type I transmembrane proteins, with an N-terminal ectodomain that contains several consensus sequences for glycosaminoglycan (GAG) attachment and a short C-terminal cytoplasmic domain. Syndecan-1 and -3 GAG attachment sites occur in two distinct clusters, one near the N-terminus and the other near the membrane-attachment site, separated by a proline and threonine-rich 'spacer'. Syndecan ectodomain sequences are poorly conserved in the family and between species, but the transmembrane and cytoplasmic domains are highly conserved. Syndecan-1 and -3 form a subfamily. Syndecan core proteins form dimers (Choi et al. 2007) and at least syndecan-3 and -4 form oligomers (Asundi & Carey 1995, Shin et al. 2012). Syndecan-1 is the major syndecan of epithelial cells including vascular endothelium. Syndecan-2 is present mostly in mesenchymal, neuronal and smooth muscle cells. Syndecan-3 is the major syndecan of the nervous system, while syndecan-4 is ubiquitously expressed but at lower levels than the other syndecans (refs in Alexopoulou et al. 2007). The core syndecan protein has three to five heparan sulfate or chondroitin sulfate chains, which interact with a variety of ligands including fibroblast growth factors, vascular endothelial growth factor, transforming growth factor-beta, fibronectin, collagen, vitronectin and several integrins. Syndecans may act as integrin coreceptors. Interactions between fibronectin and syndecans are modulated by tenascin-C. Syndecans bind a wide variety of soluble and insoluble ligands, inckluding extracellular matrix components, cell adhesion molecules, growth factors, cytokines, and proteinases. As the cleaved ectodomains of syndecans retain the ability to bind ligands, ectodomain shedding is a mechanism for releasing soluble effectors that may compete for ligands with their cell-bound counterparts (Kainulainen et al. 1998). Shed ectodomains are found in inflammatory fluids (Subramanian et al. 1997) and may induce the proliferation of cancer cells (Maeda et al. 2004). 
R-HSA-499943	Synthesis and interconversion of nucleotide di- and triphosphates	An array of kinases catalyze the reversible phosphorylation of nucleotide monophosphates to form nucleotide diphosphates and triphosphates.<p>Nucleoside monophosphate kinases catalyze the reversible phosphorylation of nucleoside and deoxynucleoside 5'-monophosphates to form the corresponding nucleoside 5'-diphosphates. Most appear to have restricted specificities for nucleoside monophosphates, and to use ATP preferentially (Van Rompay et al. 2000; Anderson 1973; Noda 1973). The total number of human enzymes that catalyze these reactions in vivo is not clear. In six cases, a well-defined biochemical activity has been associated with a purified protein, and these are annotated here. However, additional nucleoside monophosphate kinase-like human proteins have been identified in molecular cloning studies whose enzymatic activities are unknown, and several distinctive nucleoside monophosphate kinase activities detected in cell extracts, e.g., a GTP-requiring adenylate kinase activity (Wilson et al. 1976) and one or more guanylate kinase activities (Jamil et al. 1975) have not been unambiguously associated with specific human proteins.<P>The nucleoside monophosphates against which each of the six well-characterized enzymes is active is shown in the table (Van Rompay et al. 2000). All six efficiently use ATP as a phosphate donor, but have some activity with other nucleoside triphosphates as well in vitro. The high concentrations of ATP relative to other nucleoside triphosphates in vivo makes it the likely major phosphate donor in these reactions under most conditions.<P>All of these phosphorylation reactions are freely reversible in vitro when carried out with purified enzymes and substrates, having equilibrium constants near 1. In vivo, high ratios of ATP to ADP are likely to favor the forward direction of these reactions, i.e., the conversion of (d)NMP and ATP to (d)NDP and ADP. At the same time, the reversibility of the reactions and the overlapping substrate specificities of the enzymes raises the possibility that this group of reactions can buffer the intracellular nucleotide pool and regulate the relative concentrations of individual nucleotides in the pool: if any one molecule builds up to unusually high levels, multiple routes appear to be open not only to dispose of it but to use it to increase the supply of less abundant nucleotides.<p>Ribonucleotide reductase catalyzes the synthesis of deoxyribonucleotide diphosphates from ribonucleotide diphosphates.
R-HSA-171286	Synthesis and processing of ENV and VPU	The two viral membrane proteins, Env and the accessory protein Vpu, which are encoded by the same mRNA, are translated on the rough ER. All virion components need to traffic from their point of synthesis to sites of assembly on the plasma membrane. Env is an integral membrane protein. It is inserted cotranslationally into ER membranes and then travels through the cellular secretory pathway where it is glycosylated, assembled into trimeric complexes, processed into the gp41 and gp120 subunits by the cellular protease furin.
R-HSA-174495	Synthesis And Processing Of GAG, GAGPOL Polyproteins	Evidence suggests that the RNA molecules used for the synthesis of Gag and Gag-Pro-Pol are not the same molecules that are packaged into virions. Gag proteins do not appear to aggregate around and capture the RNA contained in the polyribosome from which they emerged, but rather bind to and ultimately encapsidate free transcripts elsewhere. During the replication of retroviruses, large numbers of Gag molecules must be generated to serve as precursors to the structural proteins of the virions. Retroviruses have developed a mechanism that permits expression of the Gag protein at high levels relative to the protein sequences encoded in the pro and pol genes, while retaining coregulated expression. This linkage results from the use of the same initiation codon in the same mRNA to express the gag, pro, and pol genes. Translation of this RNA leads occasionally to synthesis of a fusion protein that is usually called the Gag-Pol precursor but is now more appropriately called the Gag-Pro-Pol precursor
R-HSA-2142816	Synthesis of (16-20)-hydroxyeicosatetraenoic acids (HETE)	Similar to the lipoxygenases, cytochrome P450 (CYP) enzymes catalyse the hydroxylation and epoxygenation of arachidonic acid. However, whereas lipoxygenases use an active non-heme iron to abstract hydrogen directly from arachidonic acid, CYPs contain a heme-iron active site that oxidizes its substrate by a different mechanism. They hydroxylate arachidonic acid between C-5 and C-15 to produce lipoxygenase-like hydroxyeicosatetraenoic acids (HETEs) and add a hydroxyl moiety to the sp3-hybridized omega-carbons to form a unique class of HETEs. The transfer of oxygen to the unstable arachidonic acid intermediate terminates the reaction by forming HETE or epoxy-eicosatrienoic acid (EETs), respectively (Capdevila et al. 2000, Buczynski et al. 2009, Vance & Vance 2008).
R-HSA-2142712	Synthesis of 12-eicosatetraenoic acid derivatives	The 12-eicosatetraenoic acids: 12-hydroperoxy-eicosatetraenoic acid (12-HpETE), 12-hydroxyeicosatetraenoic acid (12-HETE) and 12-oxo-eicosatetraenoic acid (12-oxoETE) are formed after the initial step of arachidonic acid oxidation by the arachidonate 12 and 15 lipoxygenases (ALOX12, ALOX12B and ALOX15 respectively). This part of the pathway is bifurcated at the level of 12S-hydroperoxy-eicosatetraenoic acid (12S-HpETE), which can either be reduced to 12S-hydro-eicosatetraenoic acid (12S-HETE) or converted to hepoxilins (Buczynski et al. 2009, Vance & Vance 2008).
R-HSA-2142770	Synthesis of 15-eicosatetraenoic acid derivatives	The 15-eicosatetraenoic acids: 15-hydroperoxy-eicosatetraenoic acid (15-HpETE), 15-hydroxyeicosatetraenoic acid (15-HETE) and 15-oxo-eicosatetraenoic acid (15-oxoETE) are formed after the initial step of arachidonic acid oxidation by the arachidonate 15-lipoxygenases (ALOX15 and ALOX15B) (Buczynski et al. 2009, Vance & Vance 2008).
R-HSA-2142688	Synthesis of 5-eicosatetraenoic acids	5-hydroperoxy-eicosatetraenoic acid (5-HpETE), 5-hydroxyeicosatetraenoic acid (5S-HETE) and 5-oxo-eicosatetraenoic acid (5-oxoETE) are formed after the initial step of arachidonic acid oxidation by arachidonate 5-lipoxygenase (ALOX5) (Buczynski et al. 2009, Vance & Vance 2008).
R-HSA-192105	Synthesis of bile acids and bile salts	In a healthy adult human, about 500 mg of cholesterol is converted to bile salts daily (Russell 2003). The major pathway for bile salt synthesis in the liver begins with the conversion of cholesterol to 7alpha-hydroxycholesterol. Bile salt synthesis can also begin with the synthesis of an oxysterol - 24-hydroxycholesterol or 27-hydroxycholesterol. In the body, the initial steps of these two pathways occur in extrahepatic tissues, generating intermediates that are transported to the liver and converted to bile salts via the 7alpha-hydroxycholesterol pathway. These extrahepatic pathways contribute little to the total synthesis of bile salts, but are thought to play important roles in cholesterol homeostasis (Javitt 2002).
R-HSA-193775	Synthesis of bile acids and bile salts via 24-hydroxycholesterol	In the body, 24-hydroxycholesterol is synthesized in the brain, exported to the liver, and converted there to bile acids and bile salts. This pathway is only a minor source of bile acids and bile salts, but appears to be critical for the disposal of excess cholesterol from the brain (Bjorkhem et al. 1998; Javitt 2002).<p>In the liver, conversion of 24-hydroxycholesterol to bile acids and bile salts is initiated with hydroxylation and oxidoreductase reactions to form 4-cholesten-7alpha,24(S)-diol-3-one. The pathway then branches: hydroxylation of 4-cholesten-7alpha,24(S)-diol-3-one to 4-cholesten-7alpha,12alpha,24(S)-triol-3-one leads ultimately to the formation of cholate, while its reduction to 5beta-cholestan-7alpha,24(S)-diol-3-one leads to chenodeoxycholate formation. In both branches, reactions in the cytosol, the mitochondrial matrix, and the peroxisomal matrix result in modifications to the ring structure, shortening and oxidation of the side chain, conversion to a Coenzyme A derivative, and conjugation with the amino acids glycine or taurine (Russell 2003). These reactions are outlined in the figure below. The final three reactions are identical to ones of bile salt synthesis initiated by 7alpha-hydroxylation and are shown as arrows with no substrates.
R-HSA-193807	Synthesis of bile acids and bile salts via 27-hydroxycholesterol	In the body, 27-hydroxycholesterol is synthesized in multiple tissues, exported to the liver, and converted there to bile acids and bile salts. This pathway is only a minor source of bile acids and bile salts, but may play a significant role particularly in the mobilization of cholesterol from lung phagocytes (Bjorkhem et al. 1994; Babiker et al. 1999; Javitt 2002).<p>In the liver, conversion of 27-hydroxycholesterol to bile acids and bile salts is initiated with hydroxylation and oxidoreductase reactions to form 4-cholesten-7alpha,27-diol-3-one. The pathway then branches: hydroxylation of 4-cholesten-7alpha,27-diol-3-one to 4-cholesten-7alpha,12alpha,27-triol-3-one leads ultimately to the formation of cholate, while its reduction to 5beta-cholestan-7alpha,27-diol-3-one leads to chenodeoxycholate formation. In both branches, reactions in the cytosol, the mitochondrial matrix, and the peroxisomal matrix result in modifications to the ring structure, shortening and oxidation of the side chain, conversion to a Coenzyme A derivative, and conjugation with the amino acids glycine or taurine (Russell 2003). These reactions are outlined in the figure below. The final nine reactions are identical to ones of bile salt synthesis initiated by 7alpha-hydroxylation and are shown as arrows with no substrates.
R-HSA-193368	Synthesis of bile acids and bile salts via 7alpha-hydroxycholesterol	In the liver, synthesis of bile acids and bile salts is initiated with the conversion of cholesterol to 7alpha-hydroxycholesterol and of 7alpha-hydroxycholesterol to 4-cholesten-7alpha-ol-3-one. The pathway then branches: hydroxylation of 4-cholesten-7alpha-ol-3-one to 4-cholesten-7alpha, 12alpha-diol-3-one leads ultimately to the formation of cholate, while its reduction to 5beta-cholestan-7alpha-ol-3-one leads to chenodeoxycholate formation. The amounts of substrate following each branch appear to be determined by abundance of the hydroxylase enzyme: in human liver, cholate synthesis predominates.<p>In both branches, reactions in the cytosol, the mitochondrial matrix, and the peroxisomal matrix result in modifications to the ring structure, shortening and oxidation of the side chain, conversion to a Coenzyme A derivative, and conjugation with the amino acids glycine or taurine. In the body, glycocholate, taurocholate, glycochenodeoxycholate, and taurochenodeoxycholate are released from hepatocytes into the bile and ultimately into the lumen of the small intestine, where they function as detergents to solubilize dietary fats. The liver synthetic pathway also yields small amounts of bile acids, cholate and deoxycholate, which may play a feedback role in regulating the bile acid synthetic pathway (Russell 2003). These reactions are outlined in the figure below.
R-HSA-1483171	Synthesis of BMP	Lysobisphosphatidic acid, also known as bis(monoacylglycerol) hydrogen phosphate (BMP), is enriched in late endosomes and not found in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) or mitochondria where phosphatidylglycerol (PG) is synthesized. Late endosomes form membrane contact sites with the ER, providing a means for PG to enter the late endosome and be converted to BMP via hydrolysis by a phospholipase A2, followed by acylation, and a reorientation of the phosphoryl ester (Poorthuis & Hostetler 1978, Heravi & Waite 1999, Hullin-Matsuda et al. 2007, Gallala & Sandhoff 2010).
R-HSA-1483076	Synthesis of CL	Cardiolipin(CL) is synthesized in the inner mitochondrial membrane (IM), when phosphatidylglycerol (PG) and cytidine diphosphate-diacylglycerol (CDP-DAG) are converted into CL (Lu et al. 2006, Houtkooper et al. 2006).
R-HSA-5358493	Synthesis of diphthamide-EEF2	Eukaryotic elongation factor 2 (EEF2) catalyzes the GTP dependent ribosomal translocation step during translation elongation. This function requires the presence of a posttranslational modification, the conversion of histidine residue 715 to diphthamide (2' [3 carboxamido 3 (trimethylammonio)propyl] L histidine) (Van Ness et al. 1978). No other protein is known to undergo this modification. The diphthamide residue is also the target of ADP ribosylation catalyzed by diphtheria toxin, which inactivates EEF2 and leads to cell death (Collier 1975; Pappenheim 1977).<p>Diphthamide synthesis proceeds in four steps: the transfer of 3 amino 3 carboxypropyl group from S adenosylmethionine to histidine 715 of EEF2, the addition of four methyl groups to the 3 amino 3 carboxypropyl moiety, the demethylation of the methylated carboxylate group to form diphthine, and the amidation of the diphthine carboxyl group (Liu et al. 2004; Lin et al. 2014; Schaffrath et al. 2014; Su et al. 2013; Uthman et al. 2013).
R-HSA-69239	Synthesis of DNA	The actual synthesis of DNA occurs in the S phase of the cell cycle. This includes the initiation of DNA replication, when the first nucleotide of the new strand is laid down during the synthesis of the primer. The DNA replication preinitiation events begin in late M or early G1 phase. 
R-HSA-446199	Synthesis of Dolichyl-phosphate	Dolichol is a polyisoprenol lipid comprised of five-carbon isoprene units linked linearly in a head-to-tail fashion. Almost all eukaryotic membranes contain dolichol and its phosphorylated form is used in the N-glycosylation of proteins where it is used as an anchor for the N-glycan sugar to the ER membrane, and as an initiation point for the synthesis. Dolichol biosynthesis occurs on the cytoplasmic face of the ER membrane, which is where N-glycosylation occurs too, so is perfectly placed to serve as a substrate for this process. Dolichyl phosphate can be obtained either from direct phosphorylation of dolichol, formed in a series of reactions from mevalonate 5-pyrophosphate, or a salvage reaction by de-phosphorylation of dolichyl diphosphate, released at the end of N-glycan biosynthesis (Cantagrel & Lefeber 2011).
R-HSA-162699	Synthesis of dolichyl-phosphate mannose	Dolichyl-phosphate-mannose (DPM, DOLPman) is the donor of mannose groups in the synthesis of the dolichyl pyrophosphate-linked precursor oligosaccharide in asparagine-linked glycosylation, in the synthesis of the glycosyl phosphatidylinositol (GPI) anchor precursor, in protein O-mannosylation and in protein C-mannosylation. Its synthesis proceeds in two steps. First, cytosolic GDP-mannose reacts with dolichyl phosphate exposed on the cytosolic face of the endoplasmic reticulum membrane to form DPM with its mannose moiety oriented toward the cytosol. The DPM molecule then flips in the endoplasmic reticulum membrane, so that its mannose moiety is in the endoplasmic reticulum lumen, accessible to the enzymes that catalyze its transfer to growing glycolipids and glycoproteins (Kinoshita and Inoue, 2000; Maeda et al, 2000).
R-HSA-480985	Synthesis of dolichyl-phosphate-glucose	Dolichyl-phosphate-glucose functions as a donor of glucose groups in reactions including three steps of N-glycan precursor biosynthesis. Dolichyl-phosphate-glucose itself is synthesized from UDP-glucose and dolichol phosphate on the cytosolic face of the endoplasmic reticulum membrane, then flipped to the luminal surface of that membrane.
R-HSA-2142670	Synthesis of epoxy (EET) and dihydroxyeicosatrienoic acids (DHET)	The epoxidation of arachidonic acid by cytochrome P450s (CYPs) results in the formation of unique bioactive lipid mediators termed epoxyeicosatrienoic acids (EETs). Each double bond has been shown to be susceptible to oxidation, resulting in 5,6-EET, 8,9-EET, 11,12-EET, and 14,15-EET. The majority of the EET biological activities are diminished by the hydrolysis to the corresponding dihydroxyeicosatrienoic acids (DHET) (Capdevila et al. 2000, Buczynski et al. 2009, Vance & Vance 2008).
R-HSA-446205	Synthesis of GDP-mannose	GDP-mannose is the mannose donor for the first 5 mannose addition reactions in the N-glycan precursor synthesis, and also for the synthesis of Dolichyl-phosphate-mannose involved in other mannose transfer reactions. It is synthesized from fructose 6-phosphate and GTP in three steps.
R-HSA-162710	Synthesis of glycosylphosphatidylinositol (GPI)	Glycosylphosphatidyl inositol (GPI) acts as a membrane anchor for many cell surface proteins. GPI is synthesized in the endoplasmic reticulum. In humans, a single pathway consisting of nine reactions appears to be responsible for the synthesis of the major GPI species involved in membrane protein anchoring. This pathway is shown in the figure. Two additional reactions, not shown, allow the synthesis of variant forms of GPI, one with an additional mannose residue and one with an additional ethanolamine (Tauron et al. 2004; Shishioh et al. 2005). These variant GPI molecules may be used for tissue-specific protein modifications, or may function independently.<p>The steps of GPI synthesis were first identified by isolating large numbers of mutant cell lines that had lost the ability to express GPI anchored proteins on their surfaces. Somatic cell hybrid analyses of these lines allowed the definition of complementation groups corresponding to distinct mutated genes, and cDNAs corresponding to normal forms of these genes were identified on the basis of their abilities to restore normal cell surface protein expression in mutant cells. Co-precipitation experiments with tagged cloned proteins have allowed the identification of additional proteins involved in GPI anchor biosynthesis.
R-HSA-2142696	Synthesis of Hepoxilins (HX) and Trioxilins (TrX)	Hepoxilins are biologically relevant signalling molecules produced by certain arachidonate 12-lipoxygenase (ALOX12s). Hepoxilin A3 (HXA3) and B3 (HXB3) have been identified, both of which incorporate an epoxide across the C-11 and C-12 double bond, as well as an additional hydroxyl moiety. HXA3 has a C-8 hydroxyl, whereas the HXB3 hydroxyl occurs at C-10. The epoxy moiety is labile and can be hydrolyzed either by a hepoxilin specific epoxide hydrolase (HXEH) or in acidic aqueous solution to form the corresponding diol metabolites trioxilin A3 (TrXA3) and B3 (TrXB3) (Buczynski et al. 2009, Vance & Vance 2008).
R-HSA-1855183	Synthesis of IP2, IP, and Ins in the cytosol	Inositol phosphates IP2, IP and the six-carbon cyclic alcohol inositol (Ins) are produced by various phosphatases and the inositol-3-phosphate synthase 1 (ISYNA1) (Ju et al. 2004, Ohnishi et al. 2007, Irvine & Schell 2001, Bunney & Katan 2010).
R-HSA-1855204	Synthesis of IP3 and IP4 in the cytosol	An array of inositol trisphosphate (IP3) and tetrakisphosphate (IP4) molecules are synthesised by the action of various kinases and phosphatases in the cytosol (Irvine & Schell 2001, Bunney & Katan 2010).
R-HSA-1855231	Synthesis of IPs in the ER lumen	In the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) lumen, inositol phosphates IP4, IP5, and IP6 are dephosphorylated by multiple inositol polyphosphate phosphatase 1 (MINPP1) (Caffrey et al. 1999, Chi et al. 1999, Deleu et al. 2006, Nogimori et al. 1991).
R-HSA-1855191	Synthesis of IPs in the nucleus	Within the nucleus, inositol polyphosphate multikinase (IPMK), inositol-pentakisphosphate 2-kinase (IPPK), inositol hexakisphosphate kinase 1 (IP6K1) and 2 (IP6K2) produce IP5, IP6, IP7, and IP8 inositol phosphate molecules (Irvine & Schell 2001, Alcazar-Romain & Wente 2008, York 2006, Monserrate and York 2010, Nalaskowski et al. 2002, Chang et al. 2002, Chang & Majerus 2006, Saiardi et al. 2001, Saiardi et al. 2000, Draskovic et al. 2008, Mulugu et al. 2007).
R-HSA-77111	Synthesis of Ketone Bodies	In a healthy, well-nourished individual, the production of ketone bodies occurs at a relatively low rate. During periods of normal physiological responses to carbohydrate shortages, the liver increases the production of ketone bodies from acetyl-CoA generated from fatty acid oxidation. This allows heart and skeletal muscle to use ketone bodies as the primary source of energy, thereby preserving the limited glucose supply for use in brain tissue.<p>In untreated <i>diabetes mellitus</i>, a huge buildup of ketone bodies occurs due to an increase in fatty acid oxidation. The production of ketone bodies exceeds the ability of peripheral tissues to oxidize them, and results in lowering the pH of blood. Blood acidification is dangerous, chiefly as it impairs the ability of hemoglobin to bind oxygen.<p>Ketone body synthesis proceeds via the synthesis of ccetoacetic acid in three steps from acetyl CoA, followed by the reduction of acetoacetic acid to beta-hydroxybutyrate. In the body, these reactions occur in the mitochondria of liver cells (Sass 2011).
R-HSA-2142691	Synthesis of Leukotrienes (LT) and Eoxins (EX)	Leukotrienes (LTs) are biologically active molecules formed in response to inflammatory stimuli. They cause contraction of bronchial smooth muscles, stimulation of vascular permeability, and attraction and activation of leukocytes. LTs were discovered in 1938 and were termed the "slow release substance" (SRS) until their structures were determined in 1979 and they were then renamed to leukotrienes. LTs are derived from arachidonic acid through action by arachidonate 5-lipoxygenase (ALOX5). Cysteinyl leukotrienes (LTC4, LTD4, and LTE4) are generated as products derived from leukotriene A4 (LTA4). Eoxins are generated from leukotrienes (LTs) and resemble cysteinyl leukotrienes but have a different three-dimensional structure (Murphy & Gijon 2007, Hammarstrom 1983, MA.Claesson 2009, Vance & Vance 2008, Buczynski et al. 2009).
R-HSA-2142700	Synthesis of Lipoxins (LX)	Lipoxins A4 (LXA4) and B4 (LXB4), structurally characterized from human neutrophils incubated with 15-hydroperoxy-eicosatetraenoic acid (15-HpETE), each contain three hydroxyl moieties and a conjugated tetraene. The third hydroxyl of LXA4 is positioned at C-6, and of LXB4 at C-14. The action of arachidonate 5-lipoxygenase (ALOX5), in concert with an arachidonate 12-lipoxygenase (ALOX12) or arachidonate 15-lipoxygenase (ALOX15) activity, has been shown to produce lipoxins by three distinct pathways. Neutrophil ALOX5 can produce and secrete leukotriene A4 (LTA4) that is taken up by platelets, where it is acted upon by ALOX12 to form lipoxins. Likewise, ALOX15s can generate either 15-hydroperoxy-eicosatetraenoic acid (15-HpETE) or 15-hydro-eicosatetraenoic acid (15-HETE) that can be taken up by monocytes and neutrophils, where highly expressed ALOX5 uses it to generate lipoxins. Finally, aspirin acetylated prostaglandin G/H synthase 2 (PTGS2), rendered unable to synthesize prostaglandins, can act as a 15-lipoxygenase. This leads to the formation of 15R-HETE and culminates in creation of epi-lipoxins, which have altered stereochemistry at the C-15 hydroxyl but similar biological potency (Chiang et al. 2006, Buczynski et al. 2009, Vance & Vance 2008).
R-HSA-1483166	Synthesis of PA	In the de novo synthesis of phosphatidic acid (PA), lysophosphatidic acid (LPA) is initially formed by the esterification of sn-1 by glycerol 3-phosphate acyltransferase (GPAT) from glycerol 3-phosphate (G3P). Next, LPA is converted to PA by a LPA acyltransferase (AGPAT, also known as LPAAT). In addition to this, PA is also formed when phosphatidylcholine (PC) is hydrolyzed by phospholipases D1 and D2 (PLD1 and 2). PA is involved in acyl chain remodeling via cleavage by phospholipases followed by reacylation by acyltransferases (Ghomashchi et al. 2010, Singer et al. 2002, Prasad et al. 2011, Shindou & Shimizu 2009, Cao et al. 2006).
R-HSA-1483191	Synthesis of PC	<i>De novo</i> (Kennedy pathway) synthesis of phosphatidylcholine (PC) involves phosphorylation of choline (Cho) to phosphocholine (PCho) followed by condensing with cytidine triphosphate (CTP) to form CDP-choline (CDP-Cho). Diacylglycerol (DAG) and CDP-ETA together then form PC. Alternatively, PC is formed when phosphatidylethanolamine (PE) is methylated by phosphatidylethanolamine N-methyltransferase (PEMT) (Henneberry et al. 2002; Wright & McMaster 2002).
R-HSA-1483213	Synthesis of PE	<i>De novo</i> (Kennedy pathway) synthesis of phosphatidylethanolamine (PE) involves phosphorylation of ethanolamine (ETA) to phosphoethanolamine (PETA) followed by condensing with cytidine triphosphate (CTP) to form CDP-ethanolamine (CDP-ETA). Diacylglycerol (DAG) and CDP-ETA together then form PE. Alternatively, PE is formed when phosphatidylserine (PS) is decarboxylated by phosphatidylserine decarboxylase proenzyme (PISD) (Henneberry et al. 2002, Vance 1991, Vance 1990).
R-HSA-1483148	Synthesis of PG	Phosphatidylglycerol (PG) is synthesised at the inner mitochondrial (IM) membrane, phosphatidic acid (PA) and cytidine triphosphate (CTP) are converted into cytidine diphosphate-diacylglycerol (CDP-DAG), which in turn is converted with glycerol-3-phosphate (G3P) into phosphatidylglycerophosphate (PGP) and cytidine monophosphate (CMP). Finally, PGP is dephosphorylated to PG. In addition, PG can be synthesised at the endoplamic reticulum (ER) membrane when phospholipase D transphosphatidylates phosphatidylcholine (PC) with glycerol to displace choline (Cho) and form PG (Piazza & Marmer 2007, Stuhne-Sekalec et al. 1986, Lykidis et al. 1997, Cao & Hatch 1994).
R-HSA-1483226	Synthesis of PI	Phosphatidylinositol (PI) is synthesized when phosphatidic acid (PA) and cytidine triphosphate (CTP) are converted into cytidine diphosphate-diacylglycerol (CDP-DAG) followed by conversion into PI and cytidine monophosphate (CMP) (Stuhne-Sekalec et al 1986, Lykidis et al. 1997).
R-HSA-1660516	Synthesis of PIPs at the early endosome membrane	At the early endosome membrane, phosphatidylinositol 3,5-bisphosphate (PI(3,5)P2) is generated in two steps from phosphatidylinositol 3,4-bisphosphate PI(3,4)P2 by the action of various kinases and phosphatases (Sbrissa et al. 2007, Sbrissa et al. 2008, Cao et al. 2007, Cao et al. 2008, Arcaro et al. 2000, Kim et al. 2002).
R-HSA-1483248	Synthesis of PIPs at the ER membrane	At the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) membrane, phosphatidylinositol (PI) and phosphatidylinositol 4-phosphate (PI4P) are interconverted (Wong et al. 1997, Gehrmann et al. 1999, Wei et al. 2002, Rohde et al. 2003).
R-HSA-1660514	Synthesis of PIPs at the Golgi membrane	At the Golgi membrane, phosphatidylinositol 4-phosphate (PI4P) is primarily generated from phosphorylation of phosphatidylinositol (PI). Other phosphoinositides are also generated by the action of various kinases and phosphatases such as: phosphatidylinositol 3-phosphate (PI3P), phosphatidylinositol 3,4-bisphosphate (PI(3,4)P2), phosphatidylinositol 3,5-bisphosphate (PI(3,5)P2) (Godi et al. 1999, Minogue et al. 2001, Rohde et al. 2003, Sbrissa et al. 2007, Sbrissa et al. 2008, Domin et al. 2000, Arcaro et al. 2000).
R-HSA-1660517	Synthesis of PIPs at the late endosome membrane	At the late endosome membrane, the primary event is the dephosphorylation of the phosphoinositide phosphatidylinositol 3,5-bisphosphate (PI(3,5)P2) to phosphatidylinositol 3-phosphate (PI3P) and phosphatidylinositol 5-phosphate (PI5P) (Sbrissa et al. 2007, Sbrissa et al. 2008, Cao et al. 2007, Cao et al. 2008, Arcaro et al. 2000, Kim et al. 2002).
R-HSA-1660499	Synthesis of PIPs at the plasma membrane	At the plasma membrane, subsequent phosphorylation of phosphatidylinositol 4-phosphate (PI4P) produces phosphatidylinositol 4,5-bisphosphate (PI(4,5)P2) and phosphatidylinositol 3,4,5-trisphosphate (PI(3,4,5)P3) while the actions of various other kinases and phosphatases produces phosphatidylinositol 3-phosphate (PI3P), phosphatidylinositol 5-phosphate (PI5P), phosphatidylinositol 3,4-bisphosphate (PI(3,4)P2), and phosphatidylinositol 3,5-bisphosphate (PI(3,5)P2) (Zhang et al. 1997, Gurung et al. 2003, Guo et al. 1999, Vanhaesebroeck et al. 1997, Tolias et al. 1998, Schaletzky et al. 2003, Kim et al. 2002, Clarke et al. 2010).
R-HSA-2162123	Synthesis of Prostaglandins (PG) and Thromboxanes (TX)	The bioactive prostaglandin (PG) signalling molecules, including PGA2, PGE2, PGF2a, and PGI2 (prostacyclin) are synthesised from arachidonic acid and its products by various prostaglandin synthase type enzymes. Prostaglandin H2 (PGH2) is the starting point for the synthesis of Thromboxanes (TXs) (Buczynski et al. 2009, Vance & Vance 2008). PGs and TXs are collectively known as the prostanoids.<br>Two enzymes, PTGS1 and 2 (COX1 and 2) both catalyze the two-step conversion of arachidonic acid to PGH2. PTGS1 is constitutively expressed in many cell types while PTGS2 is induced in response to stress and mediates the syntheses of prostaglandins associated with pain, fever, and inflammation. Aspirin irreversibly inactivates both enzymes (though it acts more efficiently on PTGS1), explaining both its antiinflammatory effects and side effects like perturbed gastic acid secretion. Drugs like celecoxib, by specifically inhibiting PTGS2, have a strong anti-inflammatory effect with fewer side effects. These PTGS2-specific drugs, however, probably because of their effects on the balance of prostaglandin synthesis in platelets and endothelial cells, can also promote blood clot formation (Buczynski et al. 2009; Stables & Gilroy 2011).
R-HSA-1483101	Synthesis of PS	Phosphatidylserine (PS) is synthesized by facilitating the exchange of L-Serine (L-Ser) with the choline (Cho) head group in phosphatidylcholine (PC) and with the ethanolamine (ETA) head group in phosphatidylethanolamine (PE) (Saito et al. 1998, Tomohiro et al. 2009).
R-HSA-1855167	Synthesis of pyrophosphates in the cytosol	Inositol phosphates such as IP4, IP5 and IP6 are converted to an even wider variety of IPs including the di- and triphospho inositol phosphates, also known as pyrophosphates (Irvine & Schell 2001, Alcazar-Romain & Wente 2008, York 2006, Monserrate and York 2010, Ho et al. 2002, Saiardi et al. 2001, Draskovic et al. 2008, Choi et al. 2007, Caffrey et al. 2000, Leslie et al. 2002).
R-HSA-446219	Synthesis of substrates in N-glycan biosythesis	Reactions for the synthesis of the small nucleotide-linked sugar substrates that are used in the synthesis of the N-glycan precursor and in the later steps of glycosylation are annotated here.<br>All these nucleotide-linked sugar donors are synthesized in the cytosol; however, to participate in the later reactions of N-glycan precursor biosynthesis (when the glycan is oriented toward the lumen of the endoplasmic reticulum (ER)), these substrates must be attached to a dolichyl-phosphate molecule and then flipped toward the luminal side of the ER, through a mechanism which is still not known but which involves a different protein than the one that mediates the flipping of the LLO itself (Sanyal et al. 2008). Two of the genes encoding enzymes involved in these reactions, MPI and PMM2, are known to be associated with Congenital Disorders of Glycosylation (CDG) diseases of type I. Of these, CDG-Ia, associated with defects in PMM2, is the most frequent CDG disease reported.
R-HSA-446210	Synthesis of UDP-N-acetyl-glucosamine	UDP-acetylglucosamine acts as a donor for the first two steps of the N-glycan precursor biosynthesis pathway, and is later used as a substrate for further modifications after the precursor has been attached to the protein. It is synthesized from fructose 6-phosphate, glutamine, acetyl-CoA, and UTP in four steps.
R-HSA-75876	Synthesis of very long-chain fatty acyl-CoAs	Very long-chain fatty acids (VLCFA), ones with more than 20 carbon atoms, have diverse physiological roles, notably as components of ceramides in membrane lipids and as precursors of the eicosanoid hormones that play central roles in the generation and resolution of inflammatory responses. Saturated and monounsaturated VLCFAs can be synthesized by elongation od palmitic acid synthesized de novo or derived from the diet. Polyunsaturated VLCFAs are synthesized from dietary linoleic and linolenic acids - humans lack the desaturase enzymes to synthesize these molecules from stearate.<p>Chemically, the elongation process that yields VLCFA parallels the one by which palmitate (16 carbones) or stearate (18 carbons) are synthesized de novo from acetate. The starting fatty acid is activated by conjugation with coenzyme A (CoA-SH), condensed with malonyl-CoA to form a 3-oxoacyl CoA containing two more carbon atoms than the starting long chain fatty acyl CoA and CO2, reduced with NADPH to a 3-hydroxyacyl CoA, dehydrated to a trans 2,3-enoyl-CoA, and reduced with NADPH to yield a fatty acyl-CoA two carbons longer than the starting one.<p>The process differs from the de novo one in that the enzymatic activities resposible for each step are expressed by different proteins associated with the endoplasmic reticulum membrane, not by separate domains of a single multifunctional cytosolic protein. In humans, activation is catalyzed by one of five acyl-CoA synthetase long-chain (ACSL) enzymes, conjugation by one of seven elongation of very long chain fatty acids (ELOVL) proteins, reduction by one of two HSB17B estradiol dehydrogenases, dehydration by one of four protein tyrosine phosphatase-like / 3-hydroxyacyl-CoA dehydratase (PTPL / HACD) proteins, and reduction by one of two trans-2,3-enoyl-CoA reductase (TECR) proteins. Members of the four enzyme families differ in their tissue-specific expression patterns and in their substrate preferences (chain length, degree of saturation), leading to tissue-specific complements of VLCA (Jakobsson et al. 2006; Kihara 2012; Nugteren 1965).<p>Here the full two-carbon elongation cycle to form stearate from palmitate is annotated, as well as the activation and condensation steps for elongation of arachidonate, the 20-carbon unsaturated fatty acid that plays a central role in the synthesis of prostaglandins and related hormones.
R-HSA-6782861	Synthesis of wybutosine at G37 of tRNA(Phe)	Derivatives of wyosine are tricyclic bases found at nucleotide 37 of tRNA(Phe) in eukaryotes. The pathway of wybutosine synthesis begins with a templated guanosine residue and proceeds through 6 steps catalyzed by 5 enzymes: N1 methylation of guanosine, condensation of 1-methylguanosine with pyruvate to yield 4-demethylwyosine, addition of an aminocarboxypropyl group to yield yW-86, methylation of yW-86 to yield yW-72, methylation of yW-72 to yield yW-58, and methoxycarbonylation of yW-58 to yield wybutosine (reviewed in Young and Bandarian 2013, Perche-Letuve et al. 2014). Wybutosine may further be modified by hydroxylation and methylation. Wyosine derivatives at position 37 of tRNAs participate in translational fidelity by stabilizing codon-anticodon pairing (Konevega et al. 2004) and preventing frameshifting (Waas et al. 2007).
R-HSA-422085	Synthesis, secretion, and deacylation of Ghrelin	Ghrelin is a peptide hormone of 28 amino acid residues which is acylated at the serine-3 of the mature peptide. Ghrelin is synthesized in several tissues: X/A-like cells of the gastric mucosa (the major source of ghrelin), hypothalamus, pituitary, adrenal gland, thyroid, breast, ovary, placenta, fallopian tube, testis, prostate, liver, gall bladder, pancreas, fat tissue, human lymphocytes, spleen, kidney, lung, skeletal muscle, myocardium, vein and skin. Ghrelin binds the GHS-R1a receptor present in hypothalamus pituitary, and other tissues. Binding causes appetite stimulation and release of growth hormone. Levels of circulating ghrelin rise during fasting, peak before a meal, and fall according to the calories ingested.<br>Preproghrelin is cleaved to yield proghrelin which is then acylated by ghrelin O-acyltransferase to yield octanoyl ghrelin and decanoyl ghrelin. Only octanoyl ghrelin is able to bind and activate the GHS-R1a receptor. Unacylated ghrelin (des-acyl ghrelin) is also present in plasma but its function is controversial.<br>Acyl proghrelin is cleaved by prohormone convertase 1/3 to yield the mature acyl ghrelin and C-ghrelin. Secretion of ghrelin is inhibited by insulin, growth hormone (somatotropin), leptin, glucose, glucagon, and fatty acids. Secretion is stimulated by insulin-like growth factor-1 and muscarinic agonists.<br>In the bloodstream acyl ghrelin is deacylated by butyrylcholinesterase and platelet-activating factor acetylhydrolase. Other enzymes may also deacylate acyl ghrelin.
R-HSA-381771	Synthesis, secretion, and inactivation of Glucagon-like Peptide-1 (GLP-1)	In L cells of the intestine the transcription factors TCF-4 (TCF7L2) and Beta-catenin form a heterodimer and bind the G2 enhancer of the Proglucagon gene GCG,activating its transcription to yield Proglucagon mRNA and, following translation, Proglucagon protein. The prohormone convertase PC1 present in the secretory granules of L cells cleaves Proglucagon at two sites to yield mostly Glucagon-like Peptide-1 (7-36) with a small amount of Glucagon-like Peptide-1 (7-37). Glucagon-like Peptide-1 (7-36 and 7-37) (GLP-1) is secreted into the bloodstream in response to glucose, fatty acids, insulin, leptin, gastrin-releasing peptide, cholinergic transmitters, beta-adrenergic transmitters, and peptidergic transmitters. The half-life of GLP-1 in the bloodstream is determined by Dipeptidyl Peptidase IV, which cleaves 2 amino acids at the amino terminus of GLP-1, rendering it biologically inactive.
R-HSA-400511	Synthesis, secretion, and inactivation of Glucose-dependent Insulinotropic Polypeptide (GIP)	In K cells of the intestine the transcription factors PAX6 and PDX-1 activate transcription of the gene encoding Glucose-dependent Insulinotropic Polypeptide (GIP, first called Gastric Inhibitory Peptide). ProGIP is cleaved in secretory granules by Prohormone Convertase 1 (PC1) at 2 sites to yield mature GIP. In response to fat the GIP is secreted into the bloodstream. The half-life of GIP in the bloodstream is determined by Dipeptidyl Peptidase IV, which cleaves 2 amino acids at the amino terminus of GIP, rendering it biologically inactive.
R-HSA-2033515	t(4;14) translocations of FGFR3	Translocations which put the FGFR3 gene under the control of the strong IGH promoter have been identified in 15% of multiple myelomas (Avet-Loiseau, 1998; Chesi, 1997; Chesi, 2001). This translocation, which occurs 70kb upstream of the FGFR3 gene, also involves the nearby multiple myeloma SET-domain containing (MMSET) gene (Lauring, 2008), and although the contribution of each of these genes to the development of cancer has not been fully elucidated, several studies have shown that t(4:14) myeloma cell lines are sensitive to FGFR3 inhibitors (Trudel, 2006; Qing, 2009). In ~5% of cases, the translocation is accompanied by activating mutations of FGFR3 (Onwuazor, 2003; Ronchetti, 2001). The t(4;14) translocation results in overexpression of FGFR3 and subsequent ligand independent or anomalous ligand-dependent signaling (Otsuki, 1999).
R-HSA-5358752	T41 mutants of beta-catenin aren't phosphorylated	T41 mutations of beta-catenin interfere with GSK3 phosphorylation and result in stabilization and nuclear accumulation of the protein (Moreno-Bueno et al, 2002; Taniguchi et al, 2002; reviewed in Polakis, 2012). T41 mutations have been identified in cancers of the liver and brain, as well as in the pituitary, endometrium, large intestine and skin, among others (reviewed in Polakis, 2000; Saito-Diaz et al, 2013).
R-HSA-380095	Tachykinin receptors bind tachykinins	Tachykinin peptides are one of the largest family of neuropeptides, so named due to their ability to rapidly induce contraction of gut tissue. Tachykinins excite neurons, elicit behavioural responses, are potent vasodilators and contract many smooth muscles. The tachykinin family is characterized by a common C-terminal sequence, Phe-X-Gly-Leu-Met-NH2 (where X can be either an aromatic or an aliphatic amino acid) and are ten to twelve residues long.<br><br>These peptides elicit their effects via the tachykinin receptors, of which there are three types in humans (NK1,2 and 3). There are two human tachykinin peptide genes in humans, TAC1 and TAC3. TAC1 encodes substance P and substance K while TAC3 encodes neurokinin B.<br><br>Antagonists of these receptors are promising candidates for classes of antidepressants, anxiolytics and antipsychotics.
R-HSA-445989	TAK1 activates NFkB by phosphorylation and activation of IKKs complex	NF-kappaB is sequestered in the cytoplasm in a complex with inhibitor of NF-kappaB (IkB). Almost all NF-kappaB activation pathways are mediated by IkB kinase (IKK), which phosphorylates IkB resulting in dissociation of NF-kappaB from the complex. This allows translocation of NF-kappaB to the nucleus where it regulates gene expression.
R-HSA-6791462	TALDO1 deficiency: failed conversion of  Fru(6)P, E4P to SH7P, GA3P	Mutations in transaldolase 1 (TALDO1), an enzyme of the pentose phosphate pathway that normally mediates the reversible interconversion of D-fructose 6-phosphate and D-erythrose 4-phosphate to form sedoheptulose 7-phosphate and D-glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate, have been associated with congenital liver disease (Wamelink et al. 2008).
R-HSA-6791055	TALDO1 deficiency: failed conversion of SH7P, GA3P to Fru(6)P, E4P	Mutations in transaldolase 1 (TALDO1), an enzyme of the pentose phosphate pathway that normally mediates the reversible interconversion of sedoheptulose 7-phosphate and D-glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate to form D-fructose 6-phosphate and D-erythrose 4-phosphate, have been associated with congenital liver disease (Wamelink et al. 2008).
R-HSA-1299308	Tandem of pore domain in a weak inwardly rectifying K+ channels (TWIK)	TWIK channels exhibit very low current and comprise of TWIK1, TWIK2 and KCNK7 members. TWIK current may be low due to rapid recycling of the channels from the plasma membrane.
R-HSA-1299287	Tandem pore domain halothane-inhibited K+ channel (THIK)	THIK channels are K+ leak channels that are not regulated by pH or temperature changes.
R-HSA-1296346	Tandem pore domain potassium channels	Tandem pore domain K+ channels (K2p) produce leak K+ current which stabilizes negative membrane potential and counter balances depolarization. These channels are regulated by voltage independent mechanisms such as membrane stretch, pH, temperature. Tandem pore domain K+ channels have been classified into six subfamilies; tandem pore domains in weak rectifying K+ channel (TWIK), TWIK-related K+ channel (TREK), TWIK-related acid-sensitive K+ channel (TASK), TWIK-related alkaline pH-activated K+ channel (TALK), tandem pore domain halothane-inhibted K+ channel (THIK), TWIK-releated spinal cord K+ channel).
R-HSA-167246	Tat-mediated elongation of the HIV-1 transcript	The Tat protein is a viral transactivator protein that regulates HIV-1 gene expression by controlling RNA Pol II-mediated elongation (reviewed in Karn 1999; Taube et al. 1999; Liou et al. 2004; Barboric and Peterlin 2005). Tat appears to be required in order to overcome the arrest of RNA Pol II by the negative transcriptional elongation factors DSIF and NELF (Wada et al. 1998; Yamaguchi et al. 1999; Yamaguchi et al 2002; Fujinaga et al. 2004). While Pol II can associate with the proviral LTR and initiate transcription in the absence of Tat, these polymerase complexes are non-processive and dissociate from the template prematurely producing very short transcripts (Kao et al. 1987). Tat associates with the RNA element, TAR, which forms a stem loop structure in the leader RNA sequence (Dingwall et al. 1989). Tat also associates with the cellular kinase complex P-TEFb(Cyclin T1:Cdk9) and recruits it to the TAR stem loop structure (Herrmann, 1995) (Wei et al. 1998). This association between Tat, TAR and P-TEFb(Cyclin T1:Cdk9) is believed to bring the catalytic subunit of this kinase complex (Cdk9) in close proximity to Pol II where it hyperphosphorylates the CTD of RNA Pol II (Zhou et al. 2000). The RD subunits of NELF and the SPT5 subunit of DSIF, which associate through RD with the bottom stem of TAR, are also phosphorylated by P-TEFb(Cyclin T1:Cdk9) (Yamaguchi et al. 2002; Fujinaga et al. 2004; Ivanov et al. 2000). Phosphorylation of RD results in its dissociation from TAR. Thus, Tat appears to facilitate transcriptional elongation of the HIV-1 transcript by hyperphosphorylating the RNA Poll II CTD and by removing the negative transcription elongation factors from TAR. In addition, there is evidence that the association of Tat with P-TEFb(Cyclin T1:Cdk9) alters the substrate specificity of P-TEFb enhancing phosphorylation of ser5 residues in the CTD of RNA Pol II (Zhou et al. 2000).
R-HSA-167243	Tat-mediated HIV elongation arrest and recovery	RNA Pol II arrest is believed to be a result of irreversible backsliding of the enzyme by ~7-14 nucleotides. TFIIS reactivates arrested RNA Pol II by promoting the excision of nascent transcript ~7-14 nucleotides upstream of the 3' end. 
R-HSA-201681	TCF dependent signaling in response to WNT	19 WNT ligands and 10 FZD receptors have been identified in human cells; interactions amongst these ligands and receptors vary in a developmental and tissue-specific manner and lead to activation of so-called 'canonical' and 'non-canonical' WNT signaling. In the canonical WNT signaling pathway, binding of a WNT ligand to the Frizzled (FZD) and lipoprotein receptor-related protein (LRP) receptors results in the inactivation of the destruction complex, the stabilization and nuclear translocation of beta-catenin and subsequent activation of T-cell factor/lymphoid enhancing factor (TCF/LEF)-dependent transcription. Transcriptional activation in response to canonical WNT signaling controls processes such as cell fate, proliferation and self renewal of stem cells, as well as contributing to oncogenesis (reviewed in MacDonald et al, 2009; Saito-Diaz et al, 2013; Kim et al, 2013).
R-HSA-5339700	TCF7L2 mutants don't bind CTBP	~50% of colorectal cancers with microsatellite instability show frameshift mutations in TCF7L2 that result in the loss of the CTBP-binding region (Duval et al, 1999; Cuillliere-Dartigues et al, 2006). These cancer cells show decreased colocalization of CTBP and TCF7L2 and have increased expression of a TCF-dependent reporter gene (Cuilliere-Dartigues et al, 2006).
R-HSA-202403	TCR signaling	The TCR is a multisubunit complex that consists of clonotypic alpha/beta chains noncovalently associated with the invariant CD3 delta/epsilon/gamma and TCR zeta chains. T cell activation by antigen presenting cells (APCs) results in the activation of protein tyrosine kinases (PTKs) that associate with CD3 and TCR zeta subunits and the co-receptor CD4. Members of the Src kinases (Lck), Syk kinases (ZAP-70), Tec (Itk) and Csk families of nonreceptor PTKs play a crucial role in T cell activation. Activation of PTKs following TCR engagement results in the recruitment and tyrosine phosphorylation of enzymes such as phospholipase C gamma1 and Vav as well as critical adaptor proteins such as LAT, SLP-76 and Gads. These proximal activation leads to reorganization of the cytoskeleton as well as transcription activation of multiple genes leading to T lymphocyte proliferation, differentiation and/or effector function. 
R-HSA-174417	Telomere C-strand (Lagging Strand) Synthesis	Due to the antiparallel nature of DNA, DNA polymerization is unidirectional, and one strand is synthesized discontinuously. This strand is called the lagging strand. Although the polymerase switching on the lagging strand is very similar to that on the leading strand, the processive synthesis on the two strands proceeds quite differently. Short DNA fragments, about 100 bases long, called Okazaki fragments are synthesized on the RNA-DNA primers first. Strand-displacement synthesis occurs, whereby the primer-containing 5'-terminus of the adjacent Okazaki fragment is folded into a single-stranded flap structure. This flap structure is removed by endonucleases, and the adjacent Okazaki fragments are joined by DNA ligase.
R-HSA-174430	Telomere C-strand synthesis initiation	DNA polymerases are not capable of de novo DNA synthesis and require synthesis of a primer, usually by a DNA-dependent RNA polymerase (primase) to begin DNA synthesis. In eukaryotic cells, the primer is synthesized by DNA polymerase alpha:primase. First, the DNA primase portion of this complex synthesizes approximately 6-10 nucleotides of RNA primer and then the DNA polymerase portion synthesizes an additional 20 nucleotides of DNA. There have been reports that TRF1 inhibits this activity at telomeres, though the mechanism and physiological relevance of this inhibition remain to be elucidated.
R-HSA-171319	Telomere Extension By Telomerase	Humans, like most eukaryotic organisms, add direct repeats to the telomere using a specialized DNA polymerase called telomerase. Telomerase is a ribonucleoprotein (RNP) complex minimally composed of a conserved protein subunit containing a reverse transcriptase domain (human telomerase reverse transcriptase, hTERT) and a template-containing RNA (human telomerase RNA component, hTERC, or hTR, hTER). The primer for telomerase is the G-rich single-strand overhang at the chromosome end. <br><br><br>Telomerase can perform multiple rounds of repeat synthesis. The reaction cycle has been inferred from in vitro studies of telomerase from multiple organisms and can be described as having four events: 1) DNA primer recognition, 2) RNA template alignment, 3) elongation, and 4) translocation. Telomeric DNA is recognized in part by a presumed "anchor site" in hTERT, which preferentially binds G-rich DNA, and this interaction can affect elongation and translocation steps. This interaction occurs 5' of the alignment of the RNA template with the end nucleotides of the chromosome. RNA alignment positions the template adjacent to the chromosome terminus. During elongation, the template directs sequential addition of nucleotides to the telomere end. After synthesis of a repeat is completed, relative movement of telomerase and the primer, termed translocation, repositions telomerase at the end of the newly added sequence to allow initiation of another round of repeat addition. <br>
R-HSA-157579	Telomere Maintenance	Telomeres are protein-DNA complexes at the ends of linear chromosomes that are important for genome stability. Telomeric DNA in humans, as in many eukaryotic organisms, consists of tandem repeats (Blackburn and Gall 1978; Moyzis et al. 1988; Meyne et al. 1989). The repeats at human telomeres are composed of TTAGGG sequences and stretch for several kilobase pairs. Another feature of telomeric DNA in many eukaryotes is a G-rich 3' single strand overhang, which in humans is estimated to be approximately 50-300 bases long (Makarov et al. 1997; Wright et al. 1997; Huffman et al. 2000). Telomeric DNA isolated from humans and several other organisms can form a lasso-type structure called a t-loop in which the 3' single-strand end is presumed to invade the double stranded telomeric DNA repeat tract (Griffith et al. 1999). Telomeric DNA is bound by multiple protein factors that play important roles in regulating telomere length and in protecting the chromosome end from recombination, non-homologous end-joining, DNA damage signaling, and unregulated nucleolytic attack (reviewed in de Lange 2005). <br><br><br>DNA attrition can occur at telomeres, which can impact cell viability. Attrition can occur owing to the "end-replication problem", a consequence of the mechanism of lagging-strand synthesis (Watson 1972; Olovnikov 1973). Besides incomplete replication, nucleolytic processing also likely contributes to telomere attrition (Huffman et al. 2000). If telomeres become critically shortened, replicative senescence can result (Harley et al. 1990). Thus, in order to undergo multiple divisions, cells need a mechanism to replenish the sequence at their chromosome ends.<br><br><br>The primary means for maintaining the sequence at chromosome ends in many eukaryotic organisms, including humans, is based on telomerase (Greider and Blackburn, 1985; Morin 1989). Telomerase is a ribonucleoprotein complex minimally composed of a conserved protein subunit containing a reverse transcriptase domain (telomerase reverse transcriptase, TERT) (Lingner et al. 1997; Nakamura et al. 1997) and a template-containing RNA (telomerase RNA component, TERC, TR, TER) (Greider and Blackburn, 1987; Feng et al 1995). Telomerase uses the RNA template to direct addition of multiple tandem repeats to the 3' G-rich single strand overhang. Besides extension by telomerase, maintenance of telomeric DNA involves additional activities, including C-strand synthesis, which fills in the opposing strand, and nucleolytic processing, which likely contributes to the generation of the 3' overhang.<br>
R-HSA-166665	Terminal pathway of complement	After cleavage of C5, C5b undergoes conformational changes and exposes a binding site for C6. C5b6 binds C7 resulting in the exposure of membrane binding sites and incorporation into target membranes. The membrane-bound C5b-7 complex can then bind C8. C5b-8 acts as a polymerizing agent for C9. The first C9 bound to C5b-8 undergoes major structural changes enabling formation of an elongated molecule and allows binding of additional C9 molecules and insertion of C9 cylinders into the target membrane. The number of C9 molecules varies from 1-12 in the membrane, although polymers containing up to fifteen C9 molecules are also possible.
R-HSA-977068	Termination of O-glycan biosynthesis	O-glycan biosynthesis can be terminated (or modified) by the addition of sialic acid residues on Core 1 and 2 glycoproteins by sialyltransferases (Varki et al. 2009).
R-HSA-5656169	Termination of translesion DNA synthesis	The initiation and extent of translesion DNA synthesis (TLS) has to be tightly controlled in order to limit TLS-induced mutagenesis, caused by the low fidelity of TLS-participating DNA polymerases. Since monoubiquitination of PCNA at lysine residue K164 is a prerequisite for the assembly of TLS complexes on damaged DNA templates, PCNA deubiquitination is a key step in TLS termination that allows DNA polymerase switching from Y family DNA polymerases involved in TLS to replicative DNA polymerases delta and epsilon (Povlsen et al. 2012, Park et al. 2014).
R-HSA-5221030	TET1,2,3 and TDG demethylate DNA	About 2-6% of all cytosine residues and 70-80% of cytosine residues in CG dinucleotides in mammalian cells are methylated at the 5 position of the pyrimidine ring. The cytosine residues are methylated by DNA methyltransferases after DNA replication and can be demethylated by passive dilution during subsequent replication or by active modification of the 5-methylcytosine base. Cytosine demethylation is developmentally regulated: one wave of demethylation occurs in primordial germ cells and one wave occurs by active demethylation in the male pronucleus after fertilization.<br>Some mechanisms of active demethylation remain controversial, however progressive oxidation of the methyl group of 5-methylcytosine followed by base excision by thymine DNA glycosylase (TDG) has been reproducibly demonstrated in vivo (reviewed in Wu and Zhang 2011, Franchini et al 2012, Cadet and Wagner 2013, Kohli and Zhang 2013, Ponnaluri et al. 2013). Ten-eleven translocation proteins TET1, TET2, and TET3 are dioxygenases that first oxidize 5-methylcytosine to 5-hydroxymethylcytosine (5-hmC) (Tahiliani et al. 2009, Ito et al. 2010), which is found in significant quantities and specific genomic locations in stem cells and neurons (Kinney and Pradhan 2013). TET proteins can further oxidize 5-hmC to 5-formylcytosine (5-fC) and then 5-carboxylcytosine (5-caC) (He et al. 2011, Ito et al. 2011). G:5-fC and G:5-caC base pairs are recognized by TDG, which excises the 5-fC or 5-caC and leaves an abasic site.<br>TET1 in mouse is expressed in neurons and its expression depends on neuronal activity (Guo et al. 2011, Kaas et al. 2013, Zhang et al. 2013). TET1 is also found in embryonic stem cells (Ficz et al. 2011, Koh et al. 2011, Wu et al. 2011) and in primordial germ cells of mice, where it plays a role in erasure of imprinting (Yamaguchi et al. 2013). TET3 is expressed in oocytes and zygotes of mice and is required for demethylation in the male pronucleus (Gu et al. 2011, Iqbal et al. 2011). TET2 is the most highly expressed TET family protein in hemopoietic stem cells and appears to act as a tumor suppressor. TET2 is also expressed in embryonic stem cells (Koh et al. 2011).
R-HSA-1474151	Tetrahydrobiopterin (BH4) synthesis, recycling, salvage and regulation	Tetrahydrobiopterin (BH4) is an essential co-factor for the aromatic amino acid hydroxylases and glycerol ether monooxygenase and it regulates nitric oxide synthase (NOS) activity. Inherited BH4 deficiency leads to hyperphenylalaninemia, and dopamine and neurotransmitter deficiency in the brain. BH4 maintains enzymatic coupling to L-arginine oxidation to produce NO. Oxidation of BH4 to BH2 results in NOS uncoupling, resulting in superoxide (O2.-) formation rather than NO. Superoxide rapidly reacts with NO to produce peroxynitrite which can further uncouple NOS.<br>These reactive oxygen species (superoxide and peroxynitrite) can contribute to increased oxidative stress in the endothelium leading to atherosclerosis and hypertension (Thony et al. 2000, Crabtree and Channon 2011,Schulz et al. 2008, Schmidt and Alp 2007). The synthesis, recycling and effects of BH4 are shown here. Three enzymes are required for the de novo biosynthesis of BH4 and two enzymes for the recycling of BH4.
R-HSA-2173789	TGF-beta receptor signaling activates SMADs	Binding of transforming growth factor beta 1 (TGF beta 1, i.e. TGFB1) to TGF beta receptor type 2 (TGFBR2) activates TGF beta receptor signaling cascade. TGFB1 is posttranslationally processed by furin (Dubois et al. 1995) to form a homodimer and secreted to the extracellular space as part of the large latent complex (LLC). After the LLC disassembles in the extracellular space, dimeric TGFB1 becomes capable of binding to TGFBR2 (Annes et al. 2003, Keski Oja et al. 2004). Formation of TGFB1:TGFBR2 complex creates a binding pocket for TGF-beta receptor type-1 (TGFBR1) and TGFBR1 is recruited to the complex by binding to both TGFB1 and TGFBR2. This results in an active heterotetrameric TGF-beta receptor complex that consists of TGFB1 homodimer bound to two heterodimers of TGFBR1 and TGFBR2 (Wrana et al. 1992, Moustakas et al. 1993, Franzen et al. 1993). TGF-beta signaling can also occur through a single heterodimer of TGFBR1 and TGFBR2, although with decreased efficiency (Huang et al. 2011). TGFBR1 and TGFBR2 interact through their extracellular domains, which brings their cytoplasmic domains together. Ligand binding to extracellular receptor domains is cooperative, but no conformational change is seen from crystal structures of either TGFB1- or TGFB3-bound heterotetrameric receptor complexes (Groppe et al. 2008, Radaev et al. 2010).<br><br>Activation of TGFBR1 by TGFBR2 in the absence of ligand is prevented by FKBP1A (FKBP12), a peptidyl-prolyl cis-trans isomerase. FKBP1A forms a complex with inactive TGFBR1 and dissociates from it only after TGFBR1 is recruited by TGFB1-bound TGFBR2 (Chen et al. 1997). <br><br>Both TGFBR1 and TGFBR2 are receptor serine/threonine kinases. Formation of the hetero-tetrameric TGF-beta receptor complex (TGFBR) in response to TGFB1 binding induces receptor rotation, so that TGFBR2 and TGFBR1 cytoplasmic kinase domains face each other in a catalytically favourable configuration. TGFBR2 trans-phosphorylates serine residues at the conserved Gly-Ser-rich juxtapositioned domain (GS domain) of TGFBR1 (Wrana et al. 1994, Souchelnytskyi et al. 1996), activating TGFBR1.<br>In addition to phosphorylation, TGFBR1 may also be sumoylated in response to TGF-beta stimulation. Sumoylation enhances TGFBR1 kinase activity (Kang et al. 2008). <br><br>The activated TGFBR complex is internalized by clathrin-mediated endocytosis into early endosomes. With the assistance of SARA, an early endosome membrane protein, phosphorylated TGFBR1 within TGFBR complex recruits SMAD2 and/or SMAD3 , i.e. R-SMADs (Tsukazaki et al. 1998). TGFBR1 phosphorylates recruited SMAD2/3 on two C-terminal serine residues (Souchelnytskyi et al. 2001). The phosphorylation changes the conformation of SMAD2/3 MH2 domain, promoting dissociation of SMAD2/3 from SARA and TGFBR1 (Souchelnytskyi et al. 1997, Macias-Silva et al. 1996, Nakao et al. 1997) and formation of SMAD2/3 trimers (Chacko et al. 2004). The phosphorylated C-terminal tail of SMAD2/3 has high affinity for SMAD4 (Co-SMAD), inducing formation of SMAD2/3:SMAD4 heterotrimers, composed of two phosphorylated R-SMADs (SMAD2 and/or SMAD3) and SMAD4 (Co-SMAD). SMAD2/3:SMAD4 heterotrimers are energetically favored over R-SMAD trimers (Nakao et al. 1997, Qin et al. 2001, Kawabata et al. 1998, Chacko et al. 2004). <br>SMAD2/3:SMAD4 heterotrimers translocate to the nucleus where they act as transcriptional regulators. 
R-HSA-2173791	TGF-beta receptor signaling in EMT (epithelial to mesenchymal transition)	In normal cells and in the early stages of cancer development, signaling by TGF-beta plays a tumor suppressive role, as SMAD2/3:SMAD4-mediated transcription inhibits cell division by downregulating MYC oncogene transcription and stimulating transcription of CDKN2B tumor suppressor gene. In advanced cancers however, TGF-beta signaling promotes metastasis by stimulating epithelial to mesenchymal transition (EMT). <br>TGFBR1 is recruited to tight junctions by binding PARD6A, a component of tight junctions. After TGF-beta stimulation, activated TGFBR2 binds TGFBR1 at tight junctions, and phosphorylates both TGFBR1 and PARD6A. Phosphorylated PARD6A recruits SMURF1 to tight junctions. SMURF1 is able to ubiquitinate RHOA, a component of tight junctions needed for tight junction maintenance, leading to disassembly of tight junctions, an important step in EMT (Wang et al. 2003, Ozdamar et al. 2005).
R-HSA-3656532	TGFBR1 KD Mutants in Cancer	Mutations in the kinase domain (KD) of TGF-beta receptor 1 (TGFBR1) have been found in Ferguson-Smith tumor i.e. multiple self-healing squamous epithelioma - MSSE (Goudie et al. 2011), breast cancer (Chen et al. 1998), ovarian cancer (Chen et al. 2001) and head-and-neck cancer (Chen et al. 2001). KD mutations reported in MSSE are nonsense and frameshift mutations that cause premature termination of TGFBR1 translation, resulting in truncated receptors that lack substantial portions of the kinase domain, or cause nonsense-mediated decay of mutant transcripts. A splice site KD mutation c.806-2A>C is predicted to result in the skipping of exon 5 and the absence of KD amino acid residues 269-324 from the mutant receptor. The splice site mutant is expressed at the cell surface but unresponsive to TGF-beta stimulation (Goudie et al. 2004).<br><br><br>TGFBR1 KD mutations reported in breast, ovarian and head-and-neck cancer are missense mutations, and it appears that these mutant proteins are partially functional but that their catalytic activity or protein stability is decreased (Chen et al. 1998, Chen et al. 2001a and b). These mutants are not shown.
R-HSA-3656535	TGFBR1 LBD Mutants in Cancer	Mutations in the ligand-binding domain (LBD) of TGF-beta receptor 1 (TGFBR1) have been reported as germline mutations in Ferguson-Smith tumor (multiple self-healing squamous epithelioma - MSSE), an autosomal-dominant skin cancer condition (Ferguson-Smith et al. 1934, Ferguson-Smith et al. 1971), with tumors frequently showing loss of heterozygosity of the wild-type TGFBR1 allele (Goudie et al. 2011). Somatic mutations in the LBD of TGFBR1 have been reported in esophageal carcinoma (Dulak et al. 2013).
R-HSA-3645790	TGFBR2 Kinase Domain Mutants in Cancer	Missense mutations in the kinase domain (KD) of TGF-beta receptor II (TGFBR2) are found in ~20% of microsatellite stable (MSS) colon cancers and make affected tumors resistant to TGF-beta (TGFB1)-mediated growth inhibition (Grady et al. 1999). While both alleles of TGFBR2 are affected by inactivating mutations in MSS colorectal cancer (Grady et al. 1999), a study of MSS esophageal carcinoma indicates that TGFBR2 KD mutations may function in a dominant-negative way (Tanaka et al. 2000). KD mutations in TGFBR2 are rarely reported in microsatellite instable (MSI) colorectal cancer (Parsons et al. 1995, Takenoshita et al. 1997).
R-HSA-3642279	TGFBR2 MSI Frameshift Mutants in Cancer	The short adenine repeat in the coding sequence of TGF-beta receptor II (TGFBR2) gene is frequently targeted by loss-of-function frameshift mutations in colon cancers with microsatellite instability (MSI). The 1- or 2-bp deletions in the adenine stretch of TGFBR2 cDNA introduce a premature stop codon that leads to degradation of the majority of mutant transcripts through nonsense-mediated decay or to production of a truncated TGFBR2 that cannot be presented on the cell surface. Cells that harbor TGFBR2 MSI frameshift mutations are resistant to TGF-beta (TGFB1)-mediated growth inhibition.
R-HSA-1663150	The activation of arylsulfatases	Sulfatase activity requires a unique posttranslational modification (PTM) of a catalytic cysteine residue into a formylglycine. This modification is impaired in patients with multiple sulfatase deficiency (MSD) due to defects in the SUMF1 (sulfatase-modifying factor 1) gene responsible for this PTM. SUMF2 can inhibit the activity of SUMF1 thereby providing a mechanism for the regulation of sulfatase activation (Ghosh 2007, Diez-Roux & Ballabio 2005).
R-HSA-844615	The AIM2 inflammasome	AIM2 is a member of the PYHIN or HIN200 family. It has a C-terminal HIN domain which can bind double-stranded DNA (dsDNA) and a PYD domain that can bind ASC via a PYD-PYD interaction. In cells expressing procaspase-1, The interaction of AIM2 with ASC leads to recruitment of procaspase-1 forming the ASC pyroptosome which induces pyroptotic cell death by generating active caspase-1. Data from AIM2 deficient mice indicates that the AIM2 inflammasome is a nonredundant sensor for dsDNA that regulates the caspase-1-dependent maturation of IL-1beta and IL-18 (Rathinam et al. 2010, Hornung & Latz, 2009).
R-HSA-2453902	The canonical retinoid cycle in rods (twilight vision)	The retinoid cycle (also referred to as the visual cycle) is the process by which the visual chromophore 11-cis-retinal (11cRAL) is released from light-activated opsins in the form all-trans-retinal and isomerized back to its 11-cis isomer ready for another photoisomerization reaction. This process involves oxidation, reduction and isomerization reactions and take place in the retinal pigment epithelium (RPE) and photoreceptor segments of the eye (von Lintig 2012, Blomhoff & Blomhoff 2006, von Lintig et al. 2010, D'Ambrosio et al. 2011). This section describes the retinoid cycle in rods during dark/twilight conditions.
R-HSA-1428517	The citric acid (TCA) cycle and respiratory electron transport	The metabolism of pyruvate provides one source of acetyl-CoA which enters the citric acid (TCA, tricarboxylic acid) cycle to generate energy and the reducing equivalent NADH. These reducing equivalents are re-oxidized back to NAD+ in the electron transport chain (ETC), coupling this process with the export of protons across the inner mitochondrial membrane. The chemiosmotic gradient created is used to drive ATP synthesis.
R-HSA-167826	The fatty acid cycling model	The "fatty acid cycling" hypothesis proposes that protonated fatty acids flip-flop in the membrane and deliver a proton to the matrix side. UCP1 catalyses the return of the fatty acid anion to the cytosolic side of the membrane, resulting in net proton transport catalysed by the protein.
R-HSA-844623	The IPAF inflammasome	The IPAF (NLRC4) inflammasome can be activated by several stimuli, most notably by Gram-negative bacteria with either type III or type IV secretion systems that result in cytosolic flagellin, which is recognized by the IPAF inflammasome (Miao et al. 2006). IPAF also recognizes the rod-component of the type III secretion system which shares a sequence motif with flagellin that is essential for detection (Miao et al. 2010). Detection of Legionella and/or flagellin may also involve NAIP5 (Zamboni et al. 2006, Lightfield et al. 2008). IPAF contains a CARD domain and can interact directly with procaspase-1 (Poyet et al. 2001) but ASC increases the maximal activation of caspase-1 in response to S. typhimurium (Mariathasan et al. 2004), S. flexneri, and P. aeruginosa suggesting a possible collaboration with a PYD-containing NLRP for responses to these pathogens (Schroder & Tschopp, 2010). IPAF mediated caspase-1 activation can lead to a particular type of cell death called 'pyroptosis' (see Schroder & Tschopp 2010). 
R-HSA-844455	The NLRP1 inflammasome	NLRP1 is activated by MDP (Faustin et al. 2007). The NLRP1 inflammasome was the first to be characterized. It was described as a complex containing NALP1, ASC, caspase-1 and caspase-5 (Martinon et al. 2002). Unlike NLRP3, NLRP1 has a C-terminal extension containing a CARD domain, which has been reported to interact directly with procaspase-1, obviating a requirement for ASC (Faustin et al. 2007), though ASC was found to augment the interaction. Mouse NLRP1 has no PYD domain and would therefore not be expected to interact directly with procaspase-1. Like the NLRP3 inflammasome, K+ efflux appears to be essential for caspase-1 activation (Wickliffe et al. 2008). Ribonucleoside triphosphates (NTPs) are required for NALP1-mediated caspase-1 activation with ATP being the most efficient, Mg2+ was also required (Faustin et al. 2007). The human NLRP1 gene has 3 paralogues in mouse that are highly polymorphic. Differences between mouse strains underlie susceptibility to anthrax lethal toxin (Boyden & Dietrich 2006). 
R-HSA-844456	The NLRP3 inflammasome	The NLRP3 (Cryopyrin) inflammasome is currently the best characterized. It consists of NLRP3, ASC (PYCARD) and procaspase-1; CARD8 (Cardinal) is also suggested to be a component. It is activated by a number of pathogens and bacterial toxins as well as diverse PAMPs, danger-associated molecular patterns (DAMPS) such as hyaluronan and uric acid, and exogenous irritants such as silica and asbestos (see Table S1 Schroder & Tschopp, 2010).<br> Mutations in NLRP3 which lead to constitutive activation are linked to the human diseases Muckle-Wells syndrome, familial cold autoinflammatory syndrome and NOMID (Ting et al. 2006), characterized by skin rashes and other symptoms associated with generalized inflammation. The cause of these symptoms is uncontrolled IL-1 beta production. Multiple studies have shown that activation of the NLRP3 inflammasome by particulate activators (e.g. Hornung et al. 2008) requires phagocytosis, but this is not required for the response to ATP, which is mediated by the P2X7 receptor (Kahlenberg & Dubyak, 2004) and appears to involve the pannexin membrane channel (Pellegrin & Suprenenant 2006). Direct binding of activators to NLRP3 has not been demonstrated and the exact process of activation is unclear, though it is speculated to involve changes in conformation that free the NACHT domain for oligomerization (Inohara & Nunez 2001, 2003).
R-HSA-2514856	The phototransduction cascade	The visual pigment (rhodopsin in rods) consists of an 11-cis-retinal (11cRAL) chromophore covalently attached to a GPCR opsin family member via a Schiff base linkage. Upon photon absorption, 11cRAL isomerizes to all trans retinal (atRAL), changing the conformation of opsin to a form that can activate the regulatory G protein transducin (Gt). The alpha subunit of Gt activates phosphodiesterase which hydrolyses cGMP to 5'-GMP. A high level of cGMP keeps cGMP-gated cation channels open, so lower cGMP levels close these channels and hyperpolarize the cell. The hyperpolarization spreads passively to the synapse located at the opposite end of the rod, where it subsequently closes voltage-gated calcium channels. Vesicular release of the neurotransmitter glutamate subsides as the intracellular calcium levels drop. This diminution of neurotransmitter release relays the light signal to postsynaptic neurons. The events below describe activation, inactivation, recovery and regulation of the phototransduction cascade in rods (Burns & Pugh 2010, Korenbrot 2012, Smith 2010).
R-HSA-167827	The proton buffering model	The "proton buffering" model proposes that UCP1 is intrinsically a proton carrier, and that fatty acid acts as a prosthetic group during proton transport. Fatty acid penetrates from the lipid phase, with its carboxyl group oriented to the proton translocation path. Here, it works as a donor-acceptor of protons between the residual carboxyl groups of UCP1. Ultimately, protons are extruded to the matrix side of the membrane.<br>Rial et al (2004) suggest fatty acids are inducers of proton transport by UCP by allowing themselves to become substrates for UCP and activation of the proton buffering mechanism itself. Binding of nucleotides to UCP inhibits it's proton transport capability. UCP accepts purine ribose tri- and di- nucleotides; GTP, ATP, GDP and ADP. The monophosphates GMP and AMP are poor ligands for UCP binding.
R-HSA-2187335	The retinoid cycle in cones (daylight vision)	Rods and cones share the same mechanism for the phototransduction process but perform functionally different roles. Although cone photoreceptors make up around 5% of all photoreceptor cells and are outnumbered 20 to 1 by rod photoreceptors, they mediate daylight vision in the human eye whereas rods mediate twilight vision. Also, cones are around 100-times less light-sensitive than rods thereby depriving us of colour vision in dark conditions in which cones cannot function. Rod function saturates in even moderate amounts of light whereas cones can adjust to even very bright light conditions, a process called light adaptation. In bright conditions, rods can take up to one hour to regain their sensitivity whereas cones can recover in a few minutes, a process called dark adaptation and which allows us to retain visual perception in changing light conditions.<br><br>Cone cells express three types of opsin which allow colour discrimination. Long Wavelength Sensitive Opsin (OPN1LW) detects red , Short Wavelength Sensitive Opsin (OPN1SW) detects blue, and Short Wavelength Sensitive Opsin (OPN1SW) detects green regions of the light spectrum.<br><br>In the canonical retinoid (visual) cycle, the visual chromophore is regenerated in reactions involving the rod outer segments (ROS) and the retinal pigment epithelium (RPE). For cones, chromophore recycling is independent of the RPE and instead involves Muller cells in the retina which supply the chromophore selectively to cones. The molecular steps of the cone retinoid (visual) cycle are outlined in this section. The ability of cones to react to bright and differing light conditions means it has to regenerate the chromophore much quicker than rods. All-trans-retinol (atROL) released from cone outer segments is taken up by Muller cells where it is directly isomerized back to 11-cis-retinol (11cROL) then esterified by LRAT. When required, these 11-cis-retinyl esters can be hydrolysed by 11-cis-RE hydrolases back to 11cROL then oxidised in the cone photoreceptor cell to regenerate 11-cis-retinal (11cRAL), the visual chromophore (see reviews von Lintig 2012, Wang & Kefalov 2011, Kefalov 2012, Wolf 2004).
R-HSA-164952	The role of Nef in HIV-1 replication and disease pathogenesis	The HIV-1 Nef protein is a 27-kDa myristoylated protein that is abundantly produced during the early phase of viral replication cycle. It is highly conserved in all primate lentiviruses, suggesting that its function is essential for survival of these pathogens. The protein name "Nef" was derived from early reports of its negative effect on viral replication, thus 'negative factor' or Nef. Subsequently it has been demonstrated that Nef plays an important role in several steps of HIV replication. In addition, it appears to be a critical pathogenic factor, as Nef-deficient SIV and HIV are significantly less pathogenic than the wild-type viruses, whereas Nef-transgenic mice show many features characteristic to HIV disease.<br><br>The role of Nef in HIV-1 replication and disease pathogenesis is determined by at least four independent activities of this protein. Nef affects the cell surface expression of several cellular proteins, interferes with cellular signal transduction pathways, enhances virion infectivity and viral replication, and regulates cholesterol trafficking in HIV-infected cells.
R-HSA-456926	Thrombin signalling through proteinase activated receptors (PARs)	Thrombin activates proteinase activated receptors (PARs) that signal through heterotrimeric G proteins of the G12/13 and Gq families, thereby connecting to a host of intracellular signaling pathways. Thrombin activates PARs by cleaving an N-terminal peptide that then binds to the body of the receptor to effect transmembrane signaling. Intermolecular ligation of one PAR molecule by another can occur but is less efficient than self-ligation. A synthetic peptide of sequence SFLLRN, the first six amino acids of the new N-terminus generated when thrombin cleaves PAR1, can activate PAR1 independent of protease and receptor cleavage. PARs are key to platelet activation. Four PARs have been identified, of which PARs 1 ,3 and 4 are substrates for thrombin. In humans PAR 1 is the predominant thrombin receptor followed by PAR4 which is less responsive to thrombin. PAR 3 is not considered important for human platelet responses as it is minimally expressed, though this is not the case for mouse. PAR2 is not expressed in platelets. In mouse platelets, Gq is necessary for platelet secretion and aggregation in response to thrombin but is not necessary for thrombin-triggered shape change. G13 appears to contribute to platelet aggregation as well as shape change in response to low concentrations of thrombin but to be unnecessary at higher agonist concentrations; G12 appears to be dispensable for thrombin signaling in platelets. G alpha (q) activates phospholipase C beta thereby triggering phosphoinositide hydrolysis, calcium mobilization and protein kinase C activation. This provides a path to calcium-regulated kinases and phosphatases, GEFs, MAP kinase cassettes and other proteins that mediate cellular responses ranging from granule secretion, integrin activation, and aggregation in platelets. Gbeta:gamma subunits can activate phosphoinositide-3 kinase and other lipid modifying enzymes, protein kinases, and channels. PAR1 activation indirectly leads to activation of cell surface 'sheddases' that liberate ligands for receptor tyrosine kinases, providing a link between thrombin and receptor tyrosine kinases involved in cell growth and differentiation. The pleiotrophic effects of PAR activation are consistent with many of thrombin's diverse actions on cells. 
R-HSA-428930	Thromboxane signalling through TP receptor	Thromboxane (TXA2) binds to the thromboxane receptor (TP). There are 2 splice variant forms of TP, differing in their cytoplasmic carboxyl terminal tails. TP beta was first identified in endothelial cells. TP alpha was identified in platelets and placenta. The major signalling route for TP is Gq-mediated stimulation of PLC and consequent increase in cellular calcium. TP also couples to G13, leading to stimulation of Rho and Rac.
R-HSA-209968	Thyroxine biosynthesis	Thyroxine (3,5,3',5'-tetraiodothyronine, T4) promotes normal growth and development. It also regulates heat and energy production. T4 is released from the thyroid gland, the largest endocrine organ in the human body. The primary hormone released is T4 although T3 (3,5,3'-triiodothyronine) is also released in small quantities. Tyrosine residues in thyroglobulin (a glycoprotein scaffold containing many tyrosine residues) are iodinated to form mono- or diiodo-tyrosine which can then couple to form either T3 or T4.
R-HSA-5602566	TICAM1 deficiency - HSE	Inborn errors of interferon immunity due to defects in toll like receptor 3 (TLR3)-mediated signaling underlie pathogenesis of herpes simplex virus type 1 (HSV1) encephalitis (HSE) in some children (Netea MG et al. 2012). Autosomal dominant (AD) and recessive (AR) deficiencies of (TIR) domain-containing adaptor inducing IFN-beta (TRIF or TICAM1) are also associated with impaired IFN production and predisposition to HSE in the course of primary infection by HSV1 (Sancho-Shimizu V et al. 2011).
R-HSA-210993	Tie2 Signaling	The Tie2/Tek receptor tyrosine kinase plays a pivotal role in vascular and hematopoietic development and is expressed exclusively on endothelial lineage. Tie2 interacts with a group of ligands belonging to angiopoietin family and undergoes activation.<br>These ligands show opposing actions, angiopoietin 1 and angiopoietin 4 stimulate the Tie2 phosphorylation and angiopoietin 2 inhibits it. Upon tyrosine phosphorylation Tie2 acts as a scaffold for various signaling proteins involved in different signal transduction cascades that can effect survival of endothelium and angiogenic sprout formation.
R-HSA-420029	Tight junction interactions	Tight junctions (TJs) are the most apical component of the epithelial junctional complex forming a belt-like structure at the cellular junction. When visualized by freeze-fracture electron microscopy they appear as a branched network of intramembrane strands that correspond to the sites of direct membrane contacts and that are composed of the integral membrane claudin proteins. The TJs act as a primary barrier to the diffusion of solutes through the paracellular space (barrier function) (Tsukita et al., 2001). They also prevent the intermixing of intramembrane proteins and lipids and thus create a boundary between the apical and the basolateral membrane domains of polarized epithelial cells (fence function) (Tsukita et al., 2001). Interestingly, the fence function seems not to depend on TJ strands (Umeda et al., 2006). Recents evidence indicates that the TJs also participate in signal transduction mechanisms which regulate cell proliferation and morphogenesis (Matter and Balda, 2003; Matter and Balda, 2007). This module describes the major molecular interactions responsible for the formation of TJ strands and for the rectruitment of the PAR-3-PKC-PAR-6 and CRB3-Pals1-PATJ complexes that function in tight junction formation (Ebnet, 2008).
R-HSA-5602410	TLR3 deficiency - HSE	Toll like receptor 3 (TLR3) recognizes double-stranded RNA (dsRNA), an intermediate product during viral replication for most viruses. TLR3 is expressed in various tissues and cells including cells of the central nervous system (CNS) (Bsibsi M et al. 2002). TLR3 activity in neurons and glial cells was found to be critical for controlling herpes simplex virus type 1 (HSV-1) infection in CNS (Lafaille FG et al. 2012). Children with inborn errors of TLR3-mediated immunity are prone to HSV-1 encephalitis (HSE), a rare life-threatening complication during HSV-1 infection (Casrouge A et al. 2006; Perez de Diego R et al. 2010; Zhang SY et al. 2007; Herman M et al. 2012; Lafaille FG et al. 2012). The functional defect in HSE patients with TLR3 deficiency is probably due to impaired induction of type I and III interferon (IFN) by cells of the CNS, which appears to be uniquely dependent upon TLR3 for protection against HSV1 (Zhang SY et al. 2007; Guo Y et al. 2011; Lafaille FG et al. 2012). Importantly, blood cells in the periphery produce normal amounts of interferons, even in TLR3-deficient patients, which perhaps can be explained by RIGI or MDA5-mediated antiviral responses. 
R-HSA-5676594	TNF receptor superfamily (TNFSF) members mediating non-canonical NF-kB pathway	Activation of NF-kB is fundamental to signal transduction by members of the TNFRSF. Expression of NF-kB target genes is essential for mounting innate immune responses to infectious microorganisms but is also important for the proper development and cellular compartmentalization of secondary lymphoid organs necessary to orchestrate an adaptive immune response. <br>NF-kB transcription factor family is activated by two distinct pathways: the canonical pathway involving NF-kB1 and the non-canonical pathway involving NF-kB2. Unlike NF-kB1 signalling, which can be activated by a wide variety of receptors, the NF-kB2 pathway is typically activated by a subset of receptor and ligand pairs belonging to the tumor necrosis factor receptor (TNF) super family (TNFRSF) members. These members include TNFR2 (Rauert et al. 2010), B cell activating factor of the TNF family receptor (BAFFR also known as TNFRSF13C) (Kayagaki et al. 2002, CD40 (also known as TNFRSF5) (Coope et al. 2002, lymphotoxin beta-receptor (LTBR also known as TNFRSF3) (Dejardin et al. 2002), receptor activator for nuclear factor kB (RANK also known as TNFRSF11A) (Novack et al. 2003), CD27 and Fibroblast growth factor-inducible immediate-early response protein 14 (FN14 also known as TNFRSF12A) etc. These receptors each mediate specific biological roles of the non-canonical NF-kB. These non-canonical NF-kB-stimulating receptors have one thing in common and is the presence of a TRAF-binding motif, which recruits different TNF receptor-associated factor (TRAF) members, particularly TRAF2 and TRAF3, to the receptor complex during ligand ligation (Grech et al. 2004, Bishop & Xie 2007). Receptor recruitment of these TRAF members leads to their degradation which is a critical step leading to the activation of NIK and induction of p100 processing (Sun 2011, 2012).
R-HSA-75893	TNF signaling	The inflammatory cytokine tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNF-alpha) is expressed in immune and nonimmune cell types including macrophages, T cells, mast cells, granulocytes, natural killer (NK) cells, fibroblasts, neurons, keratinocytes and smooth muscle cells as a response to tissue injury or upon immune responses to pathogenic stimuli (Kck A. et al. 1990; Dubravec DB et al. 1990; Walsh LJ et al. 1991; te Velde AA et al. 1990; Imaizumi T et al. 2000). TNF-alpha interacts with two receptors, namely TNF receptor 1 (TNFR1) and TNF receptor 2 (TNFR2). Activation of TNFR1 can trigger multiple signal transduction pathways inducing inflammation, proliferation, survival or cell death (Ward C et al. 1999; Micheau O and Tschopp J 2003; Widera D et al. 2006). Whether a TNF-alpha-stimulated cell will survive or die is dependent on autocrine/paracrine signals, and on the cellular context.<p>TNF binding to TNFR1 results initially in the formation of Complex I that consists of TNFR1, TRADD (TNFR1-associated death domain), TRAF2 (TNF receptor associated factor-2), RIPK1 (receptor interacting protein kinase 1), and BIRC1 and BIRC3 (cIAP1/2,cellular inhibitor of apoptosis) (Micheau O and Tschopp J 2003). This complex by default activates NFkappaB promoting cell survival (induction of anti-apoptotic proteins such as BIRC, cFLIP) and secretion of pro-inflammatory cytokines (TNF and IL-6). When the survival pathway is inhibited, TNF-induced signaling leads to the formation of Complex II that is made up of TRADD, FADD (Fas-associated death domain-containing protein, RIPK1,and procaspase-8 leading to the activation of caspase-8 and apoptotic cell death. When caspase activity is inhibited under certain pathophysiological conditions (e.g. caspase-8 inhibitory proteins such as CrmA and vICA after infection with cowpox virus or CMV) or by pharmacological agents, deubiquitinated RIPK1 is physically and functionally engaged by its homolog RIPK3 leading to formation of the necrosome, a necroptosis-inducing complex consisting of RIPK1 and RIPK3 (Tewari M & Dixit VM 1995; Fliss PM & Brune W 2012; Sawai H 2013; Moquin DM et al. 2013; Kalai M et al. 2002; Cho YS et al. 2009, He S et al. 2009, Zhang DW et al., 2009).TNF-alpha can also activate sphingomyelinase (SMASE, such as SMPD2,3) proteins to catalyze hydrolysis of sphingomyeline into ceramide (Adam D et al.1996; Adam-Klages S et al. 1998; Sgui B et al. 2001). Activation of neutral SMPD2,3 leads to an accumulation of ceramide at the cell surface and has proinflammatory effects. However, TNF can also activate the pro-apoptotic acidic SMASE via caspase-8 mediated activation of caspase-7 which in turn proteolytically cleaves and activates the 72kDa pro-A-SMase form (Edelmann B et al. 2011). Ceramide induces anti-proliferative and pro-apoptotic responses. Further, ceramide can be converted by ceramidase into sphingosine, which in turn is phosphorylated by sphingosine kinase into sphingosine-1-phosphate (S1P). S1P exerts the opposite biological effects to ceramide by activating cytoprotective signaling to promote cell growth counteracting the apoptotic stimuli (Cuvillier O et al. 1996). Thus, TNF-alpha-induced TNFR1 activation leads to divergent intracellular signaling networks with extensive cross-talk between the pro-apoptotic pathway, and the other NFkappaB, and JNK pathways providing highly specific cell responses initiated by various types of stimuli. 
R-HSA-5357956	TNFR1-induced NFkappaB signaling pathway	Activation of tumor necrosis factor receptor 1 (TNFR1) can trigger multiple signal transduction pathways to induce inflammation, cell proliferation, survival or cell death (Ward C et al. 1999; Micheau O and Tschopp J 2003; Widera D et al. 2006). Whether a TNF-alpha-stimulated cell will survive or die is dependent on the cellular context. TNF-alpha-induced signals lead to the activation of transcriptional factors such as nuclear factor-kappa B (NFkappaB) and activator protein-1 (AP1) (Ward C et al. 1999; Widera D et al. 2006; Tsou HK et al. 2012).<p> The binding of TNF-alpha to TNFR1 leads to recruitment of the adapter protein TNFR1-associated death domain (TRADD) and of receptor?interacting protein 1 (RIPK1). TRADD subsequently recruits also TNF receptor-associated factor 2 (TRAF2). RIPK1 is promptly K63-polyubiquitinated which results in the recruitment of the TAB2:TAK1 complex and the IkB kinase (IKK) complex to TNFR1. The activated IKK complex mediates phosphorylation of the inhibitor of NFkappaB (IkB), which targets IkB for ubiquitination and subsequent degradation. Released NFkappaB induces the expression of a variety of genes including inflammation-related genes and anti-apoptotic genes encoding proteins such as inhibitor of apoptosis proteins cIAP1/2, Bcl-2, Bcl-xL or cellular FLICE-like inhibitory protein (FLIP) (Blonska M et al. 2005; Ea CK et al. 2006; Wu CJ et al. 2006; Chen C et al. 2000; Manna SK et al. 2000; Kreuz S et al. 2001; Micheau O et al. 2001). NFkB-mediated inhibition of cell death also involves attenuating TNF-induced activation of c-Jun activating kinase (JNK). Whereas transient activation of JNK upon TNF treatment is associated with cellular survival, prolonged JNK activation contributes to cell death. However, as caspases activate JNK quite efficiently, JNKs are also regularly stimulated in course of apoptosis without being essential for cell death (Wicovsky A et al. 2007). AP1-mediated gene induction results from activation of JNK via TRAF2 (not shown here) (Tsou HK et al. 2012). While pro-survival signaling is initiated and regulated via the activated TNFR1 receptor complex at the cell membrane, cell death signals are induced by internalization-associated fashion upon the release of RIPK1 from the membrane complex (Micheau O and Tschopp J 2003; Schneider-Brachert W et al. 2004; Tchikov V et al. 2011).<p>TNFR1-mediated transcriptional activity of NFkB is both antiapoptotic and highly proinflammatory and thus must be tightly regulated to prevent constitutive activation that leads to persistent inflammation and cancer (Ward C et al. 1999; Fujihara S et al. 2002; Pekalski J et al. 2013; Kankaanranta H et al. 2014; Shukla S and Gupta S 2004; Jackson-Bernitsas DG et al. 2007; Zhang JY et al. 2007). Multiple mechanisms normally ensure the proper control of NFkappaB activation including two negative feedback loops mediated by NFkappaB inducible inhibitors, IkB-alpha (NFKBIA) and ubiquitin-editing protein A20 (He KL & Ting AT 2002; Wertz IE et al. 2004; Vereecke L et al. 2009; Pekalski J et al. 2013).
R-HSA-5357786	TNFR1-induced proapoptotic signaling	Activation of tumor necrosis factor receptor 1 (TNFR1) can trigger multiple signal transduction pathways to induce cell survival or cell death (Ward C et al. 1999; Micheau O and Tschopp J 2003; Widera D et al. 2006). While pro-survival signaling is initiated and regulated via the activated TNFR1 receptor complex at the cell membrane, cell death signals are induced upon the release of TRADD:TRAF2:RIP1 complex from the membrane to the cytosol where it forms death-inducing signaling complex (DISC) (Micheau O and Tschopp J 2003; Schneider-Brachert W et al. 2004). Upon apoptotic stimulation procaspase-8 or 10 is recruited into the DISC, and close proximity promotes the dimerization, autocatalytic processing, and activation of the initiator caspase-8 (and/or caspase-10) (Wang J et al. 2001; Boatright KM and Salvesen GS 2003). The initiator caspases then process and activate the downstream effector caspases such as caspase-3 in a proteolytic cascade (Stennicke HR et al. 1998). The effector caspases in turn cleave many diverse substrates, ultimately inducing cell death. 
R-HSA-5626978	TNFR1-mediated ceramide production	TNF-alpha activates sphingomyelinase (SMASE) proteins to catalyze hydrolysis of sphingomyeline into ceramide. Two types of SMASE can be distinguished downstream of TNFR1 signaling, acid and neutral SMASEs (Adam-Klages S et al. 1996, 1998). Neutral SMASE (such as SMPD2,3) has a pH optimum of 7.4, requires Mg2+ ions and is found at the plasma membrane (Rao BG and Spence MW 1976). Acid SMASE is active at pH 4-5, is Zn2+-dependent and is mainly localized in the lysosomes. The death domain of TNFR1 that is responsible for the initiation of the apoptotic pathway also mediates activation of an acid SMASE. The two proapoptotic adaptor proteins TRADD and FADD are also involved in the activation of acid SMASE signaling events (Schwandner R et al. 1998). TNF-alpha can also activate the pro-apoptotic acidic SMASE via caspase-8 mediated activation of caspase-7 which in turn proteolytically cleaves and activates the 72kDa pro-acid SMASE form (Edelmann B et al. 2011). Neutral SMASE(SMPD) binds to adaptor protein NSMAF (FAN), which bridges it to NSMASE-activating domain (NSD) of TNFR1 (Adam D et al. 1996; Adam-Klages S et al. 1996; Sgui B et al. 2001). Activation of SMPD2,3 leads to an accumulation of ceramide at the cell surface.<p>Ceramide metabolism generates a cascade of bioactive lipids, all of which carry a specific signaling capacity. Ceramide can be converted by ceramidase into sphingosine, which in turn is phosphorylated by sphingosine kinase into sphingosine-1-phosphate (S1P). These lipids exert opposite biological effects: ceramide and sphingosine are able to induce anti-proliferative and pro-apoptotic responses, whereas S1P is a cytoprotective molecule that promotes cell growth and counteracts apoptotic stimuli (Cuvillier O et al.1996) 
R-HSA-5668541	TNFR2 non-canonical NF-kB pathway	Tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNFA) exerts a wide range of biological effects through TNF receptor 1 (TNFR1) and TNF receptor 2 (TNFR2). Under normal physiological conditions TNFR2 exhibits more restricted expression, being found on certain subpopulation of immune cells and few other cell types (Grell et al. 1995 ). TNFR1 mediated signalling pathways have been very well characterized but, TNFR2 has been much less well studied. TNFR1 upon activation by TNFA activates apoptosis through two pathways, involving the adaptor proteins TNFR1-associated death domain (TRADD) and fas-associated death domain (FADD). In contrast, TNFR2 signalling especially in highly activated T cells, induces cell survival pathways that can result in cell proliferation by activating transcription factor NF-kB (nuclear factor-kB) via the alternative non-canonical route. TNFR2 signalling seems to play an important role, in particular for the function of regulatory T cells. It offers protective roles in several disorders, including autoimmune diseases, heart diseases, demyelinating and neurodegenerative disorders and infectious diseases (Faustman & Davis 2010).<br>Activation of the non-canonical pathway by TNFR2 is mediated through a signalling complex that includes TNF receptor-associated factor (TRAF2 and TRAF3), cellular inhibitor of apoptosis (cIAP1 and cIAP2), and NF-kB-inducing kinase (NIK). In this complex TRAF3 functions as a bridging factor between the cIAP1/2:TRAF2 complex and NIK. In resting cells cIAP1/2 in the signalling complex mediates K48-linked polyubiquitination of NIK and subsequent proteasomal degradation making NIK levels invisible. Upon TNFR2 stimulation, TRAF2 is recruited to the intracellular TRAF binding motif and this also indirectly recruits TRAF1 and cIAP1/2, as well as TRAF3 and NIK which are already bound to TRAF2 in unstimulated cells. TRAF2 mediates K63-linked ubiquitination of cIAP1/2 and this in turn mediates cIAP dependent K48-linked ubiquitination of TRAF3 leading to the proteasome-dependent degradation of the latter. As TRAF3 is degraded, NIK can no longer interact with TRAF1/2:cIAP complex. As a result NIK concentration in the cytosol increases and NIK gets stabilised and activated. Activated NIK phosphorylates IKKalpha, which in turn phosphorylates p100 (NFkB2) subunit. Phosphorylated p100 is also ubiquitinated by the SCF-beta-TRCP ubiquitin ligase complex and is subsequently processed by the proteaseome to p52, which is a transcriptionally competent NF-kB subunit in conjunction with RelB (Petrus et al. 2011, Sun 2011, Vallabhapurapu & Karin 2009).
R-HSA-5669034	TNFs bind their physiological receptors	Members of the tumour necrosis factor superfamily (TNFSF) and TNF receptor superfamily (TNFRSF) have crucial roles in both innate and adaptive immunity. These members are implicated in various acquired or genetic human diseases, ranging from septic shock to autoimmune disorders, allograft rejection and cancer (So et al. 2006).
R-HSA-1222538	Tolerance by Mtb to nitric oxide produced by macrophages	Reactive nitrogen species (RNS), like reactive oxygen species, have numerous target molecules in the bacterial cell, and <i>Mtb</i> has developed remedies to the most important ones of them. This is a key reason for its ability to stay alive in the hostile environment of the late phagosome within human macrophages.<br><i>Mtb</i> repairs single-base DNA damage caused by DNA alkylation; it scavenges nitric oxide with large amounts of mycothiol and methionine-rich proteins (the nitroso compounds later being reduced). Nitric oxide and peroxynitrite are also directly reduced by a battery of hemoglobins and peroxiredoxins, supported by a network of thioredoxins and respective NADPH-dependent reductases (Fang. 2004).
R-HSA-1222387	Tolerance of reactive oxygen produced by macrophages	The expression of <i>AhpC</i> in Mycobacteria does not correlate with virulence; instead, the most important parts of the antioxidant system in <i>Mtb</i> appear to be the lipid cell wall, the enzymes SodB/SodC (superoxide dismutases), and the catalase/peroxidase KatG. Together with the enzyme system that acts on nitrosative stress and the sequestration of iron, these appear to be critical in defending against the macrophage's production of ROS/RNS, and enable the bacterium to exist in the phagosome for extended periods (Zahrt & Deretic 2002).
R-HSA-168142	Toll Like Receptor 10 (TLR10) Cascade	Little is known about TLR10 ligands. It has been established that the receptor homodimerizes upon binding and signals in an MyD88-dependent manner (Hasan U et al 2005; Nyman T et al 2008). It may also heterodimerize with TLRs 1 and 2. It is expressed in a restricted fashion as a highly N-glycosylated protein detectable in B cells and dendritic cells.
R-HSA-181438	Toll Like Receptor 2 (TLR2) Cascade	TLR2 is involved in recognition of peptidoglycan from gram-positive bacteria, bacterial lipoproteins, mycoplasma lipoprotein and mycobacterial products. It is quite possible that recognition of at least some other TLR2 ligands may be assisted by additional accessory proteins, particularly in association with TLR1 or TLR6. TLR2 is expressed constitutively on macrophages, dendritic cells, and B cells, and can be induced in some other cell types, including epithelial cells. TLR1 and TLR6, on the other hand, are expressed almost ubiquitously (Muzio et al. 2000). TLR2 may be a sensor and inductor of specific defense processes, including oxidative stress and cellular necrosis initially spurred by microbial compounds.
R-HSA-168164	Toll Like Receptor 3 (TLR3) Cascade	Toll-like receptor 3 (TLR3) as was shown for mammals is expressed on myeloid dendritic cells, respiratory epithelium, macrophages, and appears to play a central role in mediating the antiviral and inflammatory responses of the innate immunity in combating viral infections.<p>Mammalian TLR3 recognizes dsRNA, and that triggers the receptor to induce the activation of NF-kappaB and the production of type I interferons (IFNs). dsRNA-stimulated phosphorylation of two specific TLR3 tyrosine residues (Tyr759 and Tyr858) is essential for initiating TLR3 signaling pathways. 
R-HSA-166016	Toll Like Receptor 4 (TLR4) Cascade	Toll-like Receptor 4 is a Microbe Associated Molecular Pattern receptor well known for it's sensitivity to Bacterial Lipopolysaccharides (LPS). LPS is assembled within diverse Gram-negative bacteria, many of which are human or plant pathogens. It is a component of the outer membrane of Gram-negative bacteria and consists of lipid A, a core polysaccharide and an O-polysaccharide of variable length (often more than 50 monosaccharide units). LPS is a potent activator of the innate immune response in humans, causing reactions including fever, headache, nausea, diarrhoea, changes in leukocyte and platelet counts, disseminated intravascular coagulation, multiorgan failure, shock and death. All these reactions are induced by cytokines and other endogenous mediators which are produced after interaction of LPS with the humoral and cellular targets of the host. In macrophages and dendritic cells, LPS-mediated activation of TLR4 triggers the biosynthesis of diverse mediators of inflammation, such as TNF-alpha and IL6, and activates the production of co-stimulatory molecules required for the adaptive immune response. In mononuclear and endothelial cells, LPS also stimulates tissue factor production. These events are desirable for clearing local infections, but when these various mediators and clotting factors are overproduced, they can damage small blood vessels and precipitate shock accompanied by disseminated intravascular coagulation and multiple organ failure.
R-HSA-168176	Toll Like Receptor 5 (TLR5) Cascade	TLR5 is the receptor for flagellin, the protein that forms bacterial flagella. Unlike most other Pathogen-Associated Molecular Patterns (PAMPs), flagellin does not undergo any posttranslational modifications that would distinguish it from cellular proteins. However, flagellin is extremely conserved at its amino- and carboxyl-termini, which presumably explains why it was selected as a ligand for innate immune recognition. TLR5 is expressed on epithelial cells as well as on macrophages and dendritic cells. Expression of TLR5 on intestinal epithelium is polarized such that TLR5 is expressed only on the basolateral side of the cell, as pathogenic but not commensal microbes cross the epithelial barrier. This ensures that innate immune responses are confined to pathogenic but not commensal microbes (Paul 2004; Hayashi et al. 2001; Gewirtz et al. 2001).
R-HSA-168181	Toll Like Receptor 7/8 (TLR7/8) Cascade	RNA can serve as a danger signal, both in its double-stranded form (that is associated with viral infection), as well as single-stranded RNA (ssRNA). Specifically, guanosine (G)- and uridine (U)-rich ssRNA oligonucleotides derived from human immunodeficiency virus-1 (HIV-1), for example, stimulate dendritic cells (DC) and macrophages to secrete interferon-alpha and proinflammatory, as well as regulatory, cytokines. This has been found to be mediated by TLR7, as well as TLR8. Separate studies showed that imidazoquinoline compounds (e.g. imiquimod and R-848, low-molecular-weight immune response modifiers that can induce the synthesis of interferon-alpha) also exert their effects in a MyD88-dependent fashion independently through TLR7 and 8 (Heil et al. 2004).
R-HSA-168138	Toll Like Receptor 9 (TLR9) Cascade	CpG DNA is an unusual Pathogen-Associated Molecular Pattern (PAMP). Cytosine methylation exists in mammalian but not bacterial cells, and most (but not all) CpG in the mammalian genome is methylated. Therefore, unmethylated CpG DNA may signal the presence of microbial infection. Evidence of CpG recognition by TLR9 was demonstrated both in human and mouse, and this type of signaling requires its internalization into late endosomal/lysosomal compartments. TLR9 has been reported to be able to discern different types of CpG motifs, and therefore that it presumably recognizes CpG DNA directly. It appears that over evolutionary periods, TLR9 molecules expressed by different species have diverged. This has led to differences in the precise sequence motif (CpG dinucleotide plus flanking regions) that optimally stimulate the innate immune system of different animals.
R-HSA-168179	Toll Like Receptor TLR1:TLR2 Cascade	TLR1 is expressed by monocytes. TLR1 and TLR2 cotranslationally form heterodimeric complexes on the cell surface and in the cytosol. The TLR2:TLR1 complex recognizes Neisserial PorB and Mycobacterial triacylated lipoproteins and peptides, amongst others, triggering up-regulation of nuclear factor-kappaB production and apoptotic cascades. Such cooperation between TLR1 and TLR2 on the cell surface of normal human peripheral blood mononuclear cells, for instance, leads to the activation of pro-inflammatory cytokine secretion (Sandor et al. 2003).
R-HSA-168188	Toll Like Receptor TLR6:TLR2 Cascade	TLR2 and TLR4 recognize different bacterial cell wall components. While TLR4 is trained onto Gram-negative lipopolysaccharide components, TLR2 - in combination with TLR6 - plays a major role in recognizing peptidoglycan wall products from Gram-positive bacteria, as well as Mycobacterial diacylated lipopeptides. In particular, TLR6 appears to participate in discriminating the subtle differences between dipalmitoyl and tripalmitoyl cysteinyl residues (Okusawa et al. 2004).
R-HSA-168898	Toll-Like Receptors Cascades	In human, ten members of the Toll-like receptor (TLR) family (TLR1-TLR10) have been identified (TLR11 has been found in mouse, but not in human). All TLRs have a similar Toll/IL-1 receptor (TIR) domain in their cytoplasmic region and an Ig-like domain in the extracellular region, where each is enriched with a varying number of leucine-rich repeats (LRRs). Each TLR can recognize specific microbial pathogen components. The binding pathogenic component to TLR initializes signaling pathways that lead to induction of Interferon alpha/beta and inflammatory cytokines. There are two main signaling pathways. The first is a MyD88-dependent pathway that is common to all TLRs, except TLR3; the second is a TRIF(TICAM1)-dependent pathway that is peculiar to TLR3 and TLR4. TLR4-mediated signaling pathway via TRIF requires adapter molecule TRAM (TRIF-related adapter molecule or TICAM2). TRAM is thought to bridge between the activated TLR4 complex and TRIF.(Takeda & Akira 2004; Akira 2003; Takeda & Akira 2005; Kawai 2005; Heine & Ulmer 2005).
R-HSA-5250968	Toxicity of botulinum toxin type A (BoNT/A)	Botulinum toxin type A (BoNT/A), a disulfide bonded heavy chain (HC) - light chain (LC) heterodimer ("dichain"), enters the gut typically as a result of consuming contaminated food (Hatheway 1995), as a complex with nontoxic nonhemagglutinin protein (NTNHA, encoded by the C. botulinum ntnha gene) and multiple copies of three hemagglutinin proteins (HA, encoded by the C. botulinum ha17, ha34, and ha70 genes) (Lee et al. 2013). The complex protects the toxin from degradation in the gut and mediates its association with the gut epithelium and transcytosis to enter the circulation. Recent studies in vitro raise the possibility that the toxin may also directly disrupt the basolateral membrane of the gut epithelium (Fujinaga et al. 2013). Circulating toxin molecules associate with gangliosides and synaptic vesicle protein 2 (SV2) exposed by exocytosis at a synapse of a target neuron in the neuromuscular junction (Yowler& Schengrund 2004; Dong et al. 2006). Vesicle recycling brings the toxin into the neuron where the vesicle is acidified (Sudhoff 2004). The lowered pH induces a conformational change in the toxin: its HC forms a passage in the vesicle membrane through which its LC is extruded into the neuronal cytosol and released by reduction of the HC - LC disulfide bond (Montal 2010). The cytosolic LC then catalyzes the cleavage of synaptosomal associated protein 25 (SNAP25) on the cytosolic face of the neuronal plasma membrane (Binz et al. 1994; Schiavo et al. 1993), thereby inhibiting synaptic vesicle fusion with the plasma membrane and exocytosis.
R-HSA-5250958	Toxicity of botulinum toxin type B (BoNT/B)	Botulinum toxin type B (BoNT/B), a disulfide-bonded heavy chain (HC) - light chain (LC) heterodimer, enters the gut typically as a result of consuming contaminated food (Hatheway 1995), as a complex with nontoxic nonhemagglutinin protein (NTNHA, encoded by the C. botulinum ntnha gene) and multiple copies of three hemagglutinin proteins (HA, encoded by the C. botulinum ha17, ha34, and ha70 genes) (Amatsu et al. 2013). The complex protects the toxin from degradation in the gut and mediates its association with the gut epithelium and transcytosis to enter the circulation (Fujinaga et al. 2013). Circulating toxin molecules associate with gangliosides and synaptotagmin (SYT) proteins exposed by exocytosis at a synapse of a target neuron (Dong et al. 2003; Yowler & Schengrund 2004). Vesicle recycling brings the toxin into the neuron where the vesicle is acidified (Sudhoff 2004). The lowered pH induces a conformational change in the toxin: its HC forms a passage in the vesicle membrane through which its LC is extruded into the neuronal cytosol. Tthe HC - LC disulfide bond is reduced (Montal 2010). The LC then catalyzes the cleavage of vesicle-associated membrane protein 2 (VAMP2) on the cytosolic face of synaptic vesicle membranes (Foran et al. 1994; Schiavo et al. 1992), thereby inhibiting synaptic vesicle fusion with the plasma membrane and exocytosis.
R-HSA-5250971	Toxicity of botulinum toxin type C (BoNT/C)	Botulinum toxin type C (BoNT/C) is only very rarely associated with human disease (Hatheway 1995) and a pathway by which it might enter the circulation from the human gut has not been described. Nevertheless, the toxin itself, a disulfide-bonded heavy chain (HC) - light chain (LC) heterodimer (dichain), is capable of binding to neurons by interactions with cell surface gangliosides (Karalewitz et al. 2012), the bound toxin can enter synaptic vesicles and release its LC moiety into the cytosol of targeted cells (Montal 2010), and the BoNT/C LC can cleave synaptosomal associated protein 25 (SNAP25) and syntaxin 1 (STX1) on the cytosolic face of the neuronal plasma membrane (Foran et al. 1996). These four events are annotated here.
R-HSA-5250955	Toxicity of botulinum toxin type D (BoNT/D)	Botulinum toxin type D (BoNT/D) is only very rarely associated with human disease (Hatheway 1995) and a pathway by which it might enter the circulation from the human gut has not been described. Nevertheless, the toxin itself, a disulfide-bonded heavy chain (HC) - light chain (LC) heterodimer (dichain), is capable of binding to neurons by interactions with cell surface ganglioside (Kroken et al. 2011) and synaptic vesicle protein 2 (SV2) (Peng et al. 2011), the bound toxin can enter synaptic vesicles and release its LC moiety into the cytosol of targeted cells (Montal 2010), and the BoNT/D LC can cleave vesicle associated membrane proteins 1 and 2 (VAMP1 and 2) on the cytosolic face of the synaptic vesicle membrane (Schiavo et al. 1993; Yamasaki et al. 1994). These four events are annotated here.
R-HSA-5250992	Toxicity of botulinum toxin type E (BoNT/E)	Botulinum toxin type E (BoNT/E), a disulfide-bonded heavy chain (HC) - light chain (LC) heterodimer (dichain), enters the gut typically as a result of consuming contaminated food (Hatheway 1995), as a complex with nontoxic nonhemagglutinin protein (NTNHA, encoded by the C. botulinum ntnha gene) (Benefield et al. 2013). The complex protects the toxin from degradation in the gut and mediates its association with the gut epithelium and transcytosis to enter the circulation (Fujinaga et al. 2013). Circulating toxin molecules associate with gangliosides and synaptic vesicle protein 2 (SV2) exposed by exocytosis at a synapse of a target neuron (Dong et al. 2008; Yowler & Schengrund 2004). Vesicle recycling brings the toxin into the neuron where the vesicle is acidified (Sudhoff 2004). The lowered pH induces a conformational change in the toxin: its HC forms a passage in the vesicle membrane through which its LC is extruded into the neuronal cytosol and released by reduction of the HC - LC disulfide bond (Montal 2010). The LC then catalyzes the cleavage of synaptosome-associated protein 25 (SNAP25) on the cytosolic face of the neuronal plasma membrane (Binz et al. 1994; Schiavo et al. 1993), thereby inhibiting synaptic vesicle fusion with the plasma membrane and exocytosis.
R-HSA-5250981	Toxicity of botulinum toxin type F (BoNT/F)	Botulinum toxin type F (BoNT/F) is only very rarely associated with human disease (Hatheway 1995) and a pathway by which it might enter the circulation from the human gut has not been described. Nevertheless, the toxin itself, a disulfide-bonded heavy chain (HC) - light chain (LC) heterodimer ("dichain"), is capable of binding to neurons by interactions with cell-surface ganglioside and synaptic vesicle protein 2 (SV2) (Fu et al. 2009; Rummel et al. 2009), the bound toxin can enter synaptic vesicles and release its LC moiety into the cytosol of targeted cells (Montal 2010), and the BoNT/F LC can cleave vesicle-associated membrane proteins 1 and 2 (VAMP1 and 2) on the cytosolic face of the synaptic vesicle membrane (Yamasaki et al. 1994). These four events are annotated here.
R-HSA-5250989	Toxicity of botulinum toxin type G (BoNT/G)	Botulinum toxin type G (BoNT/G) is rarely if ever associated with human disease (Hatheway 1995) and a pathway by which it might enter the circulation from the human gut has not been described. Nevertheless, the toxin itself, a disulfide-bonded heavy chain (HC) - light chain (LC) heterodimer ("dichain"), is capable of binding to neurons by interactions with cell-surface ganglioside and syntagmin 1 (SYT1) (Peng et al. 2012; Willjes et al. 2013), the bound toxin can enter synaptic vesicles and release its LC moiety into the cytosol of targeted cells (Montal 2010), and the BoNT/F LC can cleave vesicle-associated membrane proteins 1 and 2 (VAMP1 and 2) on the cytosolic face of the synaptic vesicle membrane (Schiavo et al. 1994; Yamasaki et al. 1994). These four events are annotated here.
R-HSA-5250982	Toxicity of tetanus toxin (TeNT)	Tetanus toxin (TeNT), a disulfide-bonded heavy chain (HC) - light chain (LC) dimer, is secreted from bacteria growing in an infected wound directly into the circulation. Circulating toxin molecules associate with gangliosides at a synapse of a target neuron. The toxin is taken up into clathrin-coated vesicles that reach the neuron cell body by retrograde transport and then possibly other neurons before undergoing acidification. Vesicle acidification causes a conformational change in the toxin, allowing its HC part to function as a channel through which its LC part is extruded into the neuronal cytosol. Cleavage of the HC - LC disulfide bond releases the LC into the cytosol, where it functions as a zinc metalloprotease to cleave vesicle-associated membrane protein 2 (VAMP2), thereby blocking synaptic vesicle exocytosis (Lalli et al. 2003).
R-HSA-5628897	TP53 Regulates Metabolic Genes	The tumor suppressor protein TP53 (p53) regulates transcription of a number of genes involved in the metabolism of carbohydrates, nucleotides and amino acids, protein synthesis and aerobic respiration.<p>TP53 stimulates transcription of TIGAR, a D-fructose 2,6-bisphosphatase. TIGAR activity decreases glycolytic rate and lowers ROS (reactive oxygen species) levels in cells (Bensaad et al. 2006). TP53 may also negatively regulate the rate of glycolysis by inhibiting the expression of glucose transporters GLUT1, GLUT3 and GLUT4 (Kondoh et al. 2005, Schwartzenberg-Bar-Yoseph et al. 2004, Kawauchi et al. 2008).<p>TP53 negatively regulates several key points in PI3K/AKT signaling and downstream mTOR signaling, decreasing the rate of protein synthesis and, hence, cellular growth. TP53 directly stimulates transcription of the tumor suppressor PTEN, which acts to inhibit PI3K-mediated activation of AKT (Stambolic et al. 2001). TP53 stimulates transcription of sestrin genes, SESN1, SESN2, and SESN3 (Velasco-Miguel et al. 1999, Budanov et al. 2002, Brynczka et al. 2007). One of sestrin functions may be to reduce and reactivate overoxidized peroxiredoxin PRDX1, thereby reducing ROS levels (Budanov et al. 2004, Papadia et al. 2008, Essler et al. 2009). Another function of sestrins is to bind the activated AMPK complex and protect it from AKT-mediated inactivation. By enhancing AMPK activity, sestrins negatively regulate mTOR signaling (Budanov and Karin 2008, Cam et al. 2014). The expression of DDIT4 (REDD1), another negative regulator of mTOR signaling, is directly stimulated by TP63 and TP53. DDIT4 prevents AKT-mediated inactivation of TSC1:TSC2 complex, thus inhibiting mTOR cascade (Cam et al. 2014, Ellisen et al. 2002, DeYoung et al. 2008). TP53 may also be involved, directly or indirectly, in regulation of expression of other participants of PI3K/AKT/mTOR signaling, such as PIK3CA (Singh et al. 2002), TSC2 and AMPKB (Feng et al. 2007). <p>TP53 regulates mitochondrial metabolism through several routes. TP53 stimulates transcription of SCO2 gene, which encodes a mitochondrial cytochrome c oxidase assembly protein (Matoba et al. 2006). TP53 stimulates transcription of RRM2B gene, which encodes a subunit of the ribonucleotide reductase complex, responsible for the conversion of ribonucleotides to deoxyribonucleotides and essential for the maintenance of mitochondrial DNA content in the cell (Tanaka et al. 2000, Bourdon et al. 2007, Kulawiec et al. 2009). TP53 also transactivates mitochondrial transcription factor A (TFAM), a nuclear-encoded gene important for mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) transcription and maintenance (Park et al. 2009). Finally, TP53 stimulates transcription of the mitochondrial glutaminase GLS2, leading to increased mitochondrial respiration rate and reduced ROS levels (Hu et al. 2010). <p>The great majority of tumor cells generate energy through aerobic glycolysis, rather than the much more efficient aerobic mitochondrial respiration, and this metabolic change is known as the Warburg effect (Warburg 1956). Since the majority of tumor cells have impaired TP53 function, and TP53 regulates a number of genes involved in glycolysis and mitochondrial respiration, it is likely that TP53 inactivation plays an important role in the metabolic derangement of cancer cells such as the Warburg effect and the concomitant increased tumorigenicity (reviewed by Feng and Levine 2010). On the other hand, some mutations of TP53 in Li-Fraumeni syndrome may result in the retention of its wild-type metabolic activities while losing cell cycle and apoptosis functions (Wang et al. 2013). Consistent with such human data, some mutations of p53, unlike p53 null state, retain the ability to regulate energy metabolism while being inactive in regulating its classic gene targets involved in cell cycle, apoptosis and senescence. Retention of metabolic and antioxidant functions of p53 protects p53 mutant mice from early onset tumorigenesis (Li et al. 2012). 
R-HSA-5602571	TRAF3 deficiency - HSE	TNF Receptor Associated Factor 3 (TRAF3) is a cytoplasmic adaptor protein utilized by the tumor necrosis factor receptor superfamily and toll-like receptors (TLRs). TRAF3 deficiency is thought to mimic the previously reported TLR3 deficiency in terms of susceptibility to herpes simplex virus type 1 (HSV1) encephalitis (HSE) via impaired TLR3-mediated immunity against HSV1 infection of central nervous system (CNS) (Prez de Diego R et al. 2010; Guo Y et al. 2011). 
R-HSA-918233	TRAF3-dependent IRF activation pathway	IPS-1/MAVS/Cardif/VISA with its TRAF-interaction motif (TIM) directly interacts with TRAF3 and recruits TRAF3 to the RIG-I/MDA5 signaling complex. TRAF3 acts as a scaffold for the assembly of a signaling complex composed of IKK epsilon/TBK1, leading to the activation of transcription factors IRF3/IRF7.
R-HSA-975138	TRAF6 mediated induction of NFkB and MAP kinases upon TLR7/8 or 9 activation	TRAF6 mediates NFkB activation via canonical phosphorylation of IKK complex by TAK1. TRAF6 and TAK1 also regulate MAPK cascades leading to the activation of AP-1.
R-HSA-168180	TRAF6 Mediated Induction of proinflammatory cytokines	In human, together with ubiquitin-conjugating E2-type enzymes UBC13 and UEV1A (also known as UBE2V1), TRAF6 catalyses Lys63-linked ubiquitination. It is believed that auto polyubiquitination and oligomerization of TRAF6 is followed by binding the ubiquitin receptors of TAB2 or TAB3 (TAK1 binding protein 2 and 3), which stimulates phosphorylation and activation of TGF beta-activated kinase 1(TAK1).<p>TAK1 phosphorylates IKK alpha and IKK beta, which in turn phosphorylate NF-kB inhibitors - IkB and eventually results in IkB degradation and NF-kB translocation to the nucleus. Also TAK1 mediates JNK and p38 MAP kinases activation by phosphorylating MKK4/7 and MKK3/6 respectivly resulting in the activation of many transcription factors. <p>The role of TRAF6 is somewhat controversial and probably cell type specific. TRAF6 autoubiquitination was found to be dispensable for TRAF6 function to activate TAK1 pathway. These findings are consistent with the new mechanism of TRAF6-mediated NF-kB activation that was suggested by Xia et al. (2009). TRAF6 generates unanchored Lys63-linked polyubiquitin chains that bind to the regulatory subunits of TAK1 (TAB2 or TAB3) and IKK(NEMO), leading to the activation of the kinases.<p> Xia et al. (2009) demonstrated in vitro that unlike polyubiquitin chains covalently attached to TRAF6 or IRAK, TAB2 and NEMO-associated ubiquitin chains were found to be unanchored and susceptible to N-terminal ubiquitin cleavage. Only K63-linked polyubiquitin chains, but not monomeric ubiquitin, activated TAK1 in a dose-dependent manner. Optimal activation of the IKK complex was achieved using ubiquitin polymers containing both K48 and K63 linkages.<p>Furthermore, the authors proposed that the TAK1 complexes might be brougt in close proximity by binding several TAB2/3 to a single polyubiquitin chain to facilitate TAK1 kinase trans-phosphorylation. Alternativly, the possibility that polyUb binding promotes allosteric activation of TAK1 complex should be considered (Walsh et al 2008).
R-HSA-937072	TRAF6 mediated induction of TAK1 complex	In human, together with ubiquitin-conjugating E2-type enzymes UBC13 and UEV1A (also known as UBE2V1), TRAF6 catalyses Lys63-linked ubiquitination. It is believed that auto polyubiquitination and oligomerization of TRAF6 is followed by binding the ubiquitin receptors of TAB2 or TAB3 (TAK1 binding protein 2 and 3), which stimulates phosphorylation and activation of TGF beta-activated kinase 1(TAK1).<p>TAK1 phosphorylates IKK alpha and IKK beta, which in turn phosphorylate NF-kB inhibitors - IkB and eventually results in IkB degradation and NF-kB translocation to the nucleus. Also TAK1 mediates JNK and p38 MAP kinases activation by phosphorylating MKK4/7 and MKK3/6 respectivly resulting in the activation of many transcription factors. <p>The role of TRAF6 is somewhat controversial and probably cell type specific. TRAF6 autoubiquitination was found to be dispensable for TRAF6 function to activate TAK1 pathway. These findings are consistent with the new mechanism of TRAF6-mediated NF-kB activation that was suggested by Xia et al. (2009). TRAF6 generates unanchored Lys63-linked polyubiquitin chains that bind to the regulatory subunits of TAK1 (TAB2 or TAB3) and IKK(NEMO), leading to the activation of the kinases.<p> Xia et al. (2009) demonstrated in vitro that unlike polyubiquitin chains covalently attached to TRAF6 or IRAK, TAB2 and NEMO-associated ubiquitin chains were found to be unanchored and susceptible to N-terminal ubiquitin cleavage. Only K63-linked polyubiquitin chains, but not monomeric ubiquitin, activated TAK1 in a dose-dependent manner. Optimal activation of the IKK complex was achieved using ubiquitin polymers containing both K48 and K63 linkages.<p>Furthermore, the authors proposed that the TAK1 complexes might be brougt in close proximity by binding several TAB2/3 to a single polyubiquitin chain to facilitate TAK1 kinase trans-phosphorylation. Alternativly, the possibility that polyUb binding promotes allosteric activation of TAK1 complex should be considered (Walsh et al 2008).
R-HSA-933541	TRAF6 mediated IRF7 activation	TRAF6 is crucial for both RIG-I- and MDA5-mediated antiviral responses. The absence of TRAF6 resulted in enhanced viral replication and a significant reduction in the production of type I IFNs and IL6 after infection with RNA virus. Activation of NF-kB and IRF7, but not that of IRF3, was significantly impaired during RIG-like helicases (RLHs) signaling in the absence of TRAF6. TRAF6-induced activation of IRF is likely to be specific for IRF7, while TRAF3 is thought to activate both IRF3 and IRF7. These results strongly suggest that the TRAF6- and TRAF3-dependent pathways are likely to bifurcate at IPS-1, but to converge later at IRF7 in order to co-operatively induce sufficient production of type I IFNs during RLH signaling.
R-HSA-975110	TRAF6 mediated IRF7 activation in TLR7/8 or 9 signaling	In plasmacytoid dendritic cell induction of type I IFNs critically depends on IFN regulatory factor 7 in TLR7 and 9 signaling (Honda et al 2005). IRF-7, but not IRF3, interacts with MyD88, TRAF6, and IRAKs and translocates to the nucleus upon phosphorylation (Kawai et al 2004; Uematsu et al 2005).<p> TLR7/8 signaling was shown to induce IRF5 activation along with IRF7 [Schoenemeyer et al 2005], while IRF8 [Tsujimura H et al 2004] and IRF1 were reported to be implicated in TLR9 signaling.
R-HSA-933542	TRAF6 mediated NF-kB activation	The TRAF6/TAK1 signal activates a canonical IKK complex, resulting in the activation of NF-kB as well as MAPK cascades leading to the activation of AP-1. Although TRAF6/TAK1 has been implicated in Tool like receptor (TLR) mediated cytokine production, the involvement of these molecules in the regulation of type I IFN induction mediated by RIG-I/MDA5 pathway is largely unknown. According to the study done by Yoshida et al RIG-I/IPS-1 pathway requires TRAF6 and MAP3K, MEKK1 to activate NF-kB and MAP Kinases for optimal induction of type I IFNs.
R-HSA-1679131	Trafficking and processing of endosomal TLR	Mammalian TLR3, TLR7, TLR8, TLR9 are endosomal receptors that sense nucleic acids that have been released from endocytosed/phagocytosed bacteria, viruses or parasites. These TLRs have a ligand-recognition domain that faces the lumen of the endosome (which is topologically equivalent to the outside of the cell), a transmembrane domain, and a signaling domain that faces the cytosol.<p>Under normal conditions, self nucleic acids are not recognized by TLRs due to multiple levels of regulation including receptor compartmentalization, trafficking and proteolytic processing (Barton GM et al 2006, Ewald SE et al 2008). At steady state TLR3, TLR7, TLR8, TLR9 reside primarily in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER), however, their activation by specific ligands only occurs within acidified endolysosomal compartments (Hacker H et al 1998, Funami K et al 2004, Gibbard RJ et al 2006). Several chaperon proteins associate with TLRs in the ER to provide efficient translocation to endolysosome. Upon reaching endolysosomal compartments the ectodomains of TLR7 and TLR9 are proteolytically cleaved by cysteine endoproteases. Both full-length and cleaved C-terminus of TLR9 bind CpG-oligodeoxynucleotides, however it has been proposed that only the processed receptor is functional.<p> Although similar cleavage of TLR3 has been reported by Ewald et al 2011, other studies demonstrated that the N-terminal region of TLR3 ectodomain was implicated in ligand binding, thus TLR3 may function as a full-length receptor (Liu L et al 2008, Tokisue T et al 2008).<p> There are no data on TLR8 processing, although the cell biology of TLR8 is probably similar to TLR9 and TLR7 (Gibbard RJ et al 2006, Wei T et al 2009).
R-HSA-399719	Trafficking of AMPA receptors	Repetitive presynaptic activity causes long lasting changes in the postsynaptic transmission by changing the type and the number of AMPA receptors. These changes are brought about by trafficking mechanisms that are mainly controlled by activity dependent phosphorylation/desphosphorylation of the GluR1/GluR2 subunits.
R-HSA-265473	Trafficking of dietary sterols	NPC1L1 protein mediates the uptake of dietary sterols from the gut lumen. These include cholesterol and plant sterols (phytosterols). Half to two-thirds of the 250-500 milligrams of cholesterol consumed daily from a typical western diet is taken up by this route and exported from enterocytes into the lymph in chylomicrons. Of the 200-400 milligrams of dietary phytosterol, only about 5% is absorbed.The drug ezetimibe interferes with NPC1L1-mediated sterol uptake (Oram and Vaughan 2006).<p>Both cholesterol and phytosterols are secreted from the liver into the bile (Salen et al. 1970). Mutations affecting the ABCG5/8 transporter complex inhibit this process (e.g., Berge et al. 2000), while the molecular details of sterol export in human cells have not been worked out, they can be inferred from the properties of the homologous mouse proteins (Graf et al. 2003; Wang et al. 2006).
R-HSA-416993	Trafficking of GluR2-containing AMPA receptors	Trafficking of GluR2-containing receptors is governed by protein protein interactions that are regulated by phosphorylation events. GluR2 binds NSF and AP2 in the proximal C terminal region and binds PICK and GRIP1/2 in the extreme C terminal region. GluR2 interaction with NSF is necessary to maintain the synaptic levels of GluR2-containing AMPA receptors both at basal levels and under conditions of synaptic activity. GluR2 interaction with GRIP helps anchor AMPA receptors at the synapse. Phosphorylation of GluR2 at S880 disrupts GRIP interaction but allows binding of PICK. PICK is activated by Ca sensitive Protein kinase C (PKC). Under basal conditions, in hippocampal synapse, GluR2-containing AMPA receptors (GluR2/GluR3) constitutively recycle between the synapse and the endosome by endocytosis and exocytosis. GRIP anchors the receptors at the synapse while PICK interaction internalizes the receptors and NSF helps maintain the synaptic receptors. Cerebellar stellate cells mainly contain GluR3 homomers as Ca permeable receptors. The interaction of GluR3 and GRIP is disrupted by PICK interaction by phosphorylation of equivalent of S880 residue in GluR3. Under conditions of repetitive presynaptic activity, there is PICK dependent removal of GluR2-lacking AMPA receptors and selective incorporation of GluR2-containing AMPA receptors at the synapse. The GluR2-containing AMPA receptors are first delivered to the surface by PICK and mobilized to the synapse by NSF dependent mechanism (Liu SJ and Cull-Candy SG Nat Neurosci. 2005 Jun;8(6):768-75)
R-HSA-5624138	Trafficking of myristoylated proteins to the cilium	A number of myristoylated proteins have been shown to traffic to the cilium in a myristoyl- and UNC119B:ARL3:RP2-dependent fashion. These include the ciliary proteins Nephrocystin 3 (NPHP3) and Cystin 1 (CYS1) (Wright et al, 2011; reviewed in Schwarz et al, 2012). Myristoyl-binding by the ARL3 effector UNC119B is required in an unknown fashion for the transport of the myristoylated cargo to the primary cilium. At the cilium, a GTPase cycle involving the ARF-like small GTPase ARL3 and its GAP protein RP2 promote the release of the myristoylated proteins into the ciliary membrane and the recycling and ciliary exit of UNC119B (Wright et al, 2011; reviewed in Schwarz et al, 2012). ARL3 plays additional roles in the cilium coordinating the association of IFT A and IFT B complexes with the kinesin motors (Li et al, 2010; reviewed in Li et al, 2012).
R-HSA-75158	TRAIL  signaling	Tumor necrosis factor-related apoptosis-inducing ligand or Apo 2 ligand (TRAIL/Apo2L) is a member of the tumor necrosis factor (TNF) family. This group of apoptosis induction pathways all work through protein interactions mediated by the intracellular death domain (DD), encoded within the cytoplasmic domain of the receptor. TRAIL selectively induces apoptosis through its interaction with the Fas-associated death domain protein (FADD) and caspase-8/10 (Wang S & el-Deiry WS 2003; Sprick MR et al. 2002). TRAIL and its receptors, TRAIL-R1 and TRAIL-R2, were shown to be rapidly endocytosed via clathrin-dependent and -independent manner in human Burkitt's lymphoma B cells (BJAB) (Kohlhaas SL et al. 2007). However, FADD and caspase-8 were able to bind TRAIL-R1/R2 in TRAIL-stimulated BJAB cells at 4<sup>o</sup>C (at which membrane trafficking is inhibited), suggesting that the endocytosis was not required for an assembly of the functional TRAIL DISC complex. Moreover, blocking of clathrin-dependent endocytosis did not interfere with the capacity of TRAIL to promote apoptosis (Kohlhaas SL et al. 2007).<br>
R-HSA-199992	trans-Golgi Network Vesicle Budding	After passing through the Golgi complex, secretory cargo is packaged into post-Golgi transport intermediates (post-Golgi), which translocate plus-end directed along microtubules to the plasma membrane.
R-HSA-74159	Transcription	Transcription by RNA Polymerase I, RNA Polymerase III and transcription from mitochondrial promoters.
R-HSA-75944	Transcription from mitochondrial promoters	Thirteen of the ~80 different proteins present in the respiratory chain of human mitochondria are encoded by the mitochondrial genome (mtDNA). The circular mtDNA, which is present in 1000 to 10000 copies in the human cell, also encodes for 2 ribosomal RNAs, and 22 transfer RNAs. The double-stranded mitochondrial genome lacks introns and the longer non-coding region contains the control elements for transcription and replication of mtDNA (Shadel and Clayton, 1997). The two mtDNA strands are referred to as the heavy (H-strand) and the light (L-strand) due to their differing G+T content. In human cells, each strand contains one single promoter for transcriptional initiation, the light-strand promoter (LSP) or the heavy-strand promoter (HSP). Transcription from the mitochondrial promoters produce polycistronic precursor RNA encompassing all the genetic information encoded in each of the specific strands. The primary transcripts are processed to produce the individual tRNA and mRNA molecules (Clayton, 1991; Ojala et al., 1981). There is likely a second initiation site for heavy strand transcription, which produces RNAs spanning the rDNA region. The resulting transcript including the genes for the two mitochondrial rRNAs and ends at the boundary between the 16 S rRNA and the tRNALeu(UUR) genes (Montoya et al., 1982; Montoya et al.,1983; Christianson and Clayton 1986). The existence of such a separate transcription unit may explain why the steady-state levels of rRNAs are much higher than the steady state levels of mRNAs.
R-HSA-167172	Transcription of the HIV genome	Expression of the integrated HIV-1 provirus is dependent on the host cell Pol II transcription machinery, but is regulated in critical ways by HIV-1 Tat and Rev proteins. The long terminal repeats (LTR) located at either end of the proviral DNA contain regulatory sequences that recruit cellular transcription factors. The U3 region of the 5' LTR contains numerous cis-acting elements that regulate Pol II-mediated transcription initiation. The full-length transcript, which encodes nine genes, functions as an mRNA and is packaged as genomic RNA. Smaller (subgenomic) viral mRNAs are generated by alternative splicing. The activities of Tat and Rev create two phases of gene expression (see Karn 1999; Cullen 1991). The Tat protein is an RNA specific trans-activator of LTR-mediated transcription. Association of Tat with TAR, a RNA stem-loop within the RNA leader sequence, is required for efficient elongation of the HIV-1 transcript. In the early phase of viral transcription, a multiply-spliced set of mRNAs is generated, producing the transcripts of the regulatory proteins, Tat, Rev, and Nef. In the late phase, Rev regulates nuclear export of HIV-1 mRNAs, repressing expression of the early regulatory mRNAs and promoting expression of viral structural proteins. Nuclear export of the unspliced and partially spliced late HIV-1 transcripts that encode the structural proteins requires the association of Rev with a cis-acting RNA sequence in the transcripts (Rev Response Element, RRE).
R-HSA-6781827	Transcription-Coupled Nucleotide Excision Repair (TC-NER)	DNA damage in transcribed strands of active genes is repaired through a specialized nucleotide excision repair (NER) pathway known as transcription-coupled nucleotide excision repair (TC-NER). TC-NER impairment is the underlying cause of a severe hereditary disorder Cockayne syndrome, an autosomal recessive disease characterized by hypersensitivity to UV light.<BR>TC-NER is triggered by helix distorting lesions that block the progression of elongating RNA polymerase II (RNA Pol II). Stalled RNA Pol II complex triggers the recruitment of ERCC6. ERCC6, commonly known as CSB (Cockayne syndrome protein B) recruits ERCC8, commonly known as CSA (Cockayne syndrome protein A). ERCC8 has 7 WD repeat motifs and is part of the ubiquitin ligase complex that also includes DDB1, CUL4A or CUL4B and RBX1. The ERCC8 ubiquitin ligase complex is one of the key regulators of TC-NER that probably exerts its role by ubiquitinating one or more factors involved in this repair process, including the RNA Pol II complex and ERCC6.<BR>In addition to RNA Pol II, ERCC6 and the ERCC8 complex, the transcription elongation factor TFIIH, which is also involved in global genome nucleotide excision repair (GG-NER), is recruited to sites of TC-NER. The TC-NER pre-incision complex also includes XPA, XAB2 complex, TCEA1 (TFIIS), HMGN1, UVSSA in complex with USP7, and EP300 (p300). XPA probably contributes to the assembly and stability of the pre-incision complex, similar to its role in GG-NER. The XAB2 complex is involved in pre-mRNA splicing and may modulate the structure of the nascent mRNA hybrid with template DNA through its RNA-DNA helicase activity, allowing proper processing of DNA damage. TCEA1 may be involved in RNA Pol II backtracking, which allows repair proteins to gain access to the damage site. It also facilitates trimming of the 3' end of protruding nascent mRNA from the stalled RNA Pol II, enabling recovery of RNA synthesis after repair.<p>Deubiquitinating activity of the UVSSA:USP7 complex is needed for ERCC6 stability at repair sites. Non-histone nucleosomal binding protein HMGN1 and histone acetyltransferase p300 (EP300) remodel the chromatin around the damaged site, thus facilitating repair.<p>Dual incision of the lesion-containing oligonucleotide from the affected DNA strand is performed by two DNA endonucleases, the ERCC1:ERCC4 (ERCC1:XPF) complex and ERCC5 (XPG), which also participate in GG-NER. DNA polymerases delta, epsilon or kappa fill in the single stranded gap after dual incision and the remaining single strand nick is sealed by DNA ligases LIG1 or LIG3 (the latter in complex with XRCC1), similar to GG-NER. After the repair of DNA damage is complete, RNA Pol II resumes RNA synthesis.<BR>For past and recent reviews, see Mellon et al. 1987, Svejstrup 2002, Hanawalt and Spivak 2008, Vermeulen and Fousteri 2013 and Marteijn et al. 2014.
R-HSA-69895	Transcriptional  activation of  cell cycle inhibitor p21 	Both p53-independent and p53-dependent mechanisms of induction of p21 mRNA have been demonstrated. p21 is transcriptionally activated by p53 after DNA damage (el-Deiry et al., 1993).
R-HSA-2151201	Transcriptional activation of mitochondrial biogenesis	Phosphorylated PPARGC1A (PGC-1alpha) does not bind DNA directly but instead interacts with other transcription factors, notably NRF1 and NRF2 (via HCF1). NRF1 and NRF2 together with PPARGC1A activate the transcription of nuclear-encoded, mitochondrially targeted proteins such as TFB2M, TFB1M, and TFAM. PGC-1beta and PPRC appear to act similarly to PGC-1alpha but have not been as well studied. Transcription of PPARGC1A itself is upregulated by CREB1 (in response to calcium), MEF2C/D, ATF2, and PPARGC1A. Transcription of PPARGC1A is repressed by NR1D1 (REV-ERBA).
R-HSA-69560	Transcriptional activation of p53 responsive genes  	p53 causes G1 arrest by inducing the expression of a cell cycle inhibitor, p21 (El-Deiry et al, 1993; Harper et al, 1993; Xiong et al, 1993). P21 binds and inactivates Cyclin-Cdk complexes that mediate G1/S progression, resulting in lack of phosphorylation of Rb, E2F sequestration and cell cycle arrest at the G1/S transition. Mice with a homozygous deletion of p21 gene are deficient in their ability to undergo a G1/S arrest in response to DNA damage (Deng et al, 1995). 
R-HSA-2173793	Transcriptional activity of SMAD2/SMAD3:SMAD4 heterotrimer	In the nucleus, SMAD2/3:SMAD4 heterotrimer complex acts as a transcriptional regulator. The activity of SMAD2/3 complex is regulated both positively and negatively by association with other transcription factors (Chen et al. 2002, Varelas et al. 2008, Stroschein et al. 1999, Wotton et al. 1999). In addition, the activity of SMAD2/3:SMAD4 complex can be inhibited by nuclear protein phosphatases and ubiquitin ligases (Lin et al. 2006, Dupont et al. 2009).
R-HSA-5578749	Transcriptional regulation by small RNAs	Recent evidence indicates that small RNAs participate in transcriptional regulation in addition to post-transcriptional silencing. Components of the RNAi machinery (ARGONAUTE1 (AGO1, EIF2C1), AGO2 (EIF2C2), AGO3 (EIF2C3), AGO4 (EIF2C4), TNRC6A, and DICER) are observed associated with microRNAs (miRNAs) in both the cytosol and the nucleus (Robb et al. 2005, Weinmann et al. 2009, Doyle et al. 2013, Nishi et al. 2013, Gagnon et al. 2014). The AGO:miRNA complexes are imported into the nucleus by IMPORTIN-8 (IPO8, IMP8, RANBP8) and also by an unknown importin while associated with the nuclear shuttling protein TNRC6A (reviewed in Schraivogel and Meister 2014).<br>Within the nucleus, AGO2, TNRC6A, and DICER may associate in a complex (Gagnon et al. 2014). Nuclear AGO1 and AGO2 in complexes with small RNAs are observed to activate transcription (RNA activation, RNAa) or repress transcription (Transcriptional Gene Silencing, TGS) of genes that contain sequences matching the small RNAs (reviewed in Malecova and Morris 2010, Huang and Li 2012, Gagnon and Corey 2012, Huang and Li 2014, Salmanidis et al. 2014, Stroynowska-Czerwinska et al. 2014). TGS is associated with methylation of cytosine in DNA and methylation of histone H3 at lysine-9 and lysine-27 (Castanotto et al. 2005, Suzuki et al. 2005, Kim et al. 2006, Weinberg et al. 2006, Kim et al. 2008, reviewed in Malecova and Morris 2010, Li et al. 2014); RNAa is associated with methylation of histone H3 at lysine-4 (Huang et al. 2012, reviewed in Li et al. 2014). Small RNAs in the nucleus have also been shown to play roles in alternative splicing (Liu et al., 2012, Ameyar-Zazoua et al., 2012) and DNA damage repair (Wei et al., 2012; Francia et al., 2012). Nevertheless, elucidation of the detailed mechanisms of small RNA action requires further research.
R-HSA-3700989	Transcriptional Regulation by TP53	TP53 regulates transcription of a number of genes involved in cellular metabolism, survival, senescence and DNA damage response. For a recent review, please refer to Vousden and Prives 2009.
R-HSA-452723	Transcriptional regulation of pluripotent stem cells	Pluripotent stem cells are undifferentiated cells posessing an abbreviated cell cycle (reviewed in Stein et al. 2012), a characteristic profile of gene expression (Rao et al. 2004, Kim et al. 2006, Player et al. 2006, Wang et al 2006 using mouse, International Stem Cell Initiative 2007, Assou et al. 2007, Assou et al. 2009, Ding et al. 2012 using mouse), and the ability to self-renew and generate all cell types of the body except extraembryonic lineages (Marti et al. 2013, reviewed in Romeo et al. 2012). They are a major cell type in the inner cell mass of the early embryo in vivo, and cells with the same properties, induced pluripotent stem cells, can be generated in vitro from differentiated adult cells by overexpression of a set of transcription factor genes (Takahashi and Yamanaka 2006, Takahashi et al. 2007, Yu et al. 2007, Jaenisch and Young 2008, Stein et al. 2012, reviewed in Dejosez and Zwaka 2012).<br>Pluripotency is maintained by a self-reinforcing loop of transcription factors (Boyer et al. 2005, Rao et al. 2006, Matoba et al. 2006, Player et al. 2006, Babaie et al. 2007, Sun et al. 2008, Assou et al. 2009, reviewed in Kashyap et al. 2009, reviewed in Dejosez and Zwaka 2012). In vivo, initiation of pluripotency may depend on maternal factors transmitted through the oocyte (Assou et al. 2009) and on DNA demethylation in the zygote (recently reviewed in Seisenberger et al. 2013) and hypoxia experienced by the blastocyst in the reproductive tract before implantation (Forristal et al. 2010, reviewed in Mohyeldin et al. 2010). In vitro, induced pluripotency may initiate with demethylation and activation of the promoters of POU5F1 (OCT4) and NANOG (Bhutani et al. 2010). Hypoxia also significantly enhances conversion to pluripotent stem cells (Yoshida et al. 2009). POU5F1 and NANOG, together with SOX2, encode central factors in pluripotency and activate their own transcription (Boyer et al 2005, Babaie et al. 2007, Yu et al. 2007, Takahashi et al. 2007). The autoactivation loop maintains expression of POU5F1, NANOG, and SOX2 at high levels in stem cells and, in turn, complexes containing various combinations of these factors (Remenyi et al. 2003, Lam et al. 2012) activate the expression of a group of genes whose products are associated with rapid cell proliferation and repress the expression of a group of genes whose products are associated with cell differentiation (Boyer et al. 2005, Matoba et al. 2006, Babaie et al. 2007, Chavez et al. 2009, Forristal et al. 2010, Guenther 2011).<br>Comparisons between human and mouse embryonic stem cells must be made with caution and for this reason inferences from mouse have been used sparingly in this module. Human ESCs more closely resemble mouse epiblast stem cells in having inactivated X chromosomes, flattened morphology, and intolerance to passaging as single cells (Hanna et al. 2010). Molecularly, human ESCs differ from mouse ESCs in being maintained by FGF and Activin/Nodal/TGFbeta signaling rather than by LIF and canonical Wnt signaling (Greber et al. 2010, reviewed in Katoh 2011). In human ESCs POU5F1 binds and directly activates the FGF2 gene, however Pou5f1 does not activate Fgf2 in mouse ESCs (reviewed in De Los Angeles et al. 2012). Differences in expression patterns of KLF2, KLF4, KLF5, ESRRB, FOXD3, SOCS3, LIN28, NODAL were observed between human and mouse ESCs (Cai et al. 2010) as were differences in expression of EOMES, ARNT and several other genes (Ginis et al.2004).
R-HSA-381340	Transcriptional regulation of white adipocyte differentiation	Adipogenesis is the process of cell differentiation by which preadipocytes become adipocytes. During this process the preadipocytes cease to proliferate, begin to accumulate lipid droplets and develop morphologic and biochemical characteristics of mature adipocytes such as hormone responsive lipogenenic and lipolytic programs. The most intensively studied model system for adipogenesis is differentiation of the mouse 3T3-L1 preadipocyte cell line by an induction cocktail of containing mitogens (insulin/IGF1), glucocorticoid (dexamethasone), an inducer of cAMP (IBMX), and fetal serum (Cao et al. 1991, reviewed in Farmer 2006). More recently additional cellular models have become available to study adipogenesis that involve almost all stages of development (reviewed in Rosen and MacDougald 2006). In vivo knockout mice lacking putative adipogenic factors have also been extensively studied. Human pathways are traditionally inferred from those discovered in mouse but are now beginning to be validated in cellular models derived from human adipose progenitors (Fischer-Posovszky et al. 2008, Wdziekonski et al. 2011).<br>Adipogenesis is controlled by a cascade of transcription factors (Yeh et al. 1995, reviewed in Farmer 2006, Gesta et al. 2007). One of the first observable events during adipocyte differentiation is a transient increase in expression of the CEBPB (CCAAT/Enhancer Binding Protein Beta, C/EBPB) and CEBPD (C/EBPD) transcription factors (Cao et al. 1991, reviewed in Lane et al. 1999). This occurs prior to the accumulation of lipid droplets. However, it is the subsequent inductions of CEBPA and PPARG that are critical for morphological, biochemical and functional adipocytes.<br>Ectopic expression of CEBPB alone is capable of inducing substantial adipocyte differentiation in fibroblasts while CEBPD has a minimal effect. CEBPB is upregulated in response to intracellular cAMP (possibly via pCREB) and serum mitogens (possibly via Krox20). CEBPD is upregulated in response to glucocorticoids. The exact mechanisms that upregulate the CEBPs are not fully known.<br>CEBPB and CEBPD act directly on the Peroxisome Proliferator-activated Receptor Gamma (PPARG) gene by binding its promoter and activating transcription. CEBPB and CEBPD also directly activate the EBF1 gene (and possibly other EBFs) and KLF5 (Jimenez et al. 2007, Oishi 2005). The EBF1 and KLF5 proteins, in turn bind, and activate the PPARG promoter. Other hormones, such as insulin, affect PPARG expression and other transcription factors, such as ADD1/SREBP1c, bind the PPARG promoter. This is an area of ongoing research.<br>During adipogenesis the PPARG gene is transcribed to yield 2 variants. The adipogenic variant 2 mRNA encodes 30 additional amino acids at the N-terminus compared to the widely expressed variant 1 mRNA.<br>PPARG encodes a type II nuclear hormone receptor (remains in the nucleus in the absence of ligand) that forms a heterodimer with the Retinoid X Receptor Alpha (RXRA). The heterodimer was initially identified as a complex regulating the aP2/FABP4 gene and named ARF6 (Tontonoz et al. 1994).<br>The PPARG:RXRA heterodimer binds a recognition sequence that consists of two hexanucleotide motifs (DR1 motifs) separated by 1 nucleotide. Binding occurs even in the absence of ligands, such as fatty acids, that activate PPARG. In the absence of activating ligands, the PPARG:RXRA complex recruits repressors of transcription such as SMRT/NCoR2, NCoR1, and HDAC3 (Tontonoz and Spiegelman 2008).<br>Each molecule of PPARG can bind 2 molecules of activating ligands. Although, the identity of the endogenous ligands of PPARG is unknown, exogenous activators include fatty acids and the thiazolidinedione class of antidiabetic drugs (reviewed in Berger et al. 2005, Heikkinen et al. 2007, Lemberger et al. 1996). The most potent activators of PPARG in vitro are oxidized derivatives of unsaturated fatty acids.. Upon binding activating ligands PPARG causes a rearrangement of adjacent factors: Corepressors such as SMRT/NCoR2 are lost and coactivators such as TIF2, PRIP, CBP, and p300 are recruited (Tontonoz and Spiegelman). PPARG also binds directly to the TRAP220 subunit of the TRAP/Mediator complex that recruits RNA polymerase II. Thus binding of activating ligand by PPARG causes transcription of PPARG target genes.<br>Targets of PPARG include genes involved in differentiation (PGAR/HFARP, Perilipin, aP2/FABP4, CEBPA), fatty acid transport (LPL, FAT/CD36), carbohydrate metabolism (PEPCK-C, AQP7, GK, GLUT4 (SLC2A4)), and energy homeostasis (LEPTIN and ADIPONECTIN) (Perera et al. 2006).<br>Within 10 days of differentiation CEBPB and CEBPD are no longer located at the PPARG promoter. Instead CEBPA is present. EBF1 and PPARG bind the CEBPA promoter and activate transcription of CEBPA, one of the key transcription factors in adipogenesis. A current hypothesis posits a self-reinforcing loop that maintains PPARG expression and the differentiated state: PPARG activates CEBPA and CEBPA activates PPARG. Additionally EBF1 (and possibly other EBFs) activates CEBPA, CEBPA activates EBF1, and EBF1 activates PPARG.
R-HSA-166020	Transfer of LPS from LBP carrier to CD14	LBP delivers LPS from bacteria (or bacterial membrane fragments) to CD14 on the surfaces of phagocytes, where it is recognised by the MD2:TLR4 complex . Thus, LBP is an opsonin and CD14 is an opsonic receptor for complexes of LPS (or LPS-containing particles such as bacteria) and LBP. CD14 exists as two isoforms. CD14 can be either secreted into the extracellular compartment, or it can be anchored to the plasma membrane via its GPI module.
R-HSA-917977	Transferrin endocytosis and recycling	Endocytosis of iron loaded transferrin/receptor complex leads, after acidification of the endosome, to the separation of iron and its diffusion out of the vesicle. The endosome is not fused with a lysosome but recycles its content back to the cell surface where soon transferrin dissociates from its receptor (Dautry-Varsat, 1986).
R-HSA-72766	Translation	Protein synthesis is accomplished through the process of translation of an mRNA sequence into a polypeptide chain. This process can be divided into three distinct stages: initiation, elongation and termination. During the initiation phase, the two subunits of the ribosome are brought together to the translation start site on the mRNA where the polypeptide chain is to begin. Extension of the polypeptide chain occurs when a specific aminoacyl-tRNA, as determined by the template mRNA, binds an elongating ribosome. The protein chain is released from the ribosome when any one of three stop codons in the relevant reading frame on the mRNA is reached. Individual reactions at each one of these stages are catalyzed by a number of initiation, elongation and release factors, respectively.
R-HSA-72649	Translation initiation complex formation	The translation initiation complex forms when the 43S complex binds the mRNA that is associated with eIF4F, eIF4B and eIF4H. eIF4G in the eIF4F complex can directly contact eIF3 in the 43S complex. eIF1A is necessary for the formation of this complex.
R-HSA-110320	Translesion Synthesis by POLH	DNA polymerase eta (POLH) consists of 713 amino acids and can bypass thymidine-thymidine dimers, correctly adding two dAMPs opposite to the lesion. Mutations in the POLH gene result in the loss of this bypass activity and account for the XP variant phenotype (XPV) in human xeroderma pigmentosum disorder patients. POLH can carry out TLS past various UV and chemically induced lesions via two steps: (a) preferential incorporation of correct bases opposite to the lesion (b) conditional elongation only at the sites where such correct bases are inserted (Masutani et al. 1999, Masutani et al. 2000).
R-HSA-5656121	Translesion synthesis by POLI	DNA polymerase iota (POLI) is a Y family DNA polymerase with an active site that favours Hoogsteen base pairing instead of Watson-Crick base pairing. POLI-mediated Hoogsteen base pairing and rotation of template purines from anti to syn conformation serves as a mechanism to displace adducts on template G or template A that interfere with DNA replication, or to allow base pairing of damaged purines with a disrupted Watson-Crick edge but an intact Hoogsteen edge (Nair et al. 2004, Nair et al. 2006).<p>POLI is recruited to DNA damage sites through its interaction with PCNA and REV1. POLI contains a PIP box and two UBMs (ubiquitin binding motifs) that are responsible for POLI binding to monoubiquitinated PCNA (MonoUb:K164-PCNA) (Bienko et al. 2005, Haracska et al. 2005, Bomar et al. 2010). The interaction between POLI and the C-terminus of REV1 is evolutionarily conserved (Kosarek et al. 2003, Guo et al. 2003, Ohashi et al. 2004).<p>After it incorporates a dNMP opposite to damaged template base, POLI is unable to efficiently elongate the DNA strand further. The elongation step is performed by the polymerase zeta complex (POLZ), composed of REV3L and MAD2L2 subunits (Johnson et al. 2000). The involvement of REV1 and POLZ in POLI-mediated translesion DNA synthesis (TLS) suggests that POLI forms a quaternary complex with REV1 and POLZ, as shown for POLK and proposed for other Y family DNA polymerases (Xie et al. 2012).
R-HSA-5655862	Translesion synthesis by POLK	DNA polymerase kappa (POLK) is a Y family DNA polymerase that is most efficient in translesion DNA synthesis (TLS) across oxidation derivatives of DNA bases, such as thymine glycol (Tg) and 8-oxoguanine (OGUA), as well as bulky DNA adducts, such as benzo(a)pyrene diol epoxide guanine adduct (BPDE-G) (Zhang et al. 2000, Fischhaber et al.2002, Avkin et al. 2004, Vasquez-Del Carpio et al. 2009, Yoon et al. 2010, Lior-Hoffmann et al. 2012, Christov et al. 2012, Yoon et al. 2014). POLK carries out TLS by forming a quaternary complex with REV1 and POLZ (REV3L:MAD2L2) at DNA damage sites, where POLK simultaneously binds REV1 and monoubiquitinated PCNA (Ohashi et al. 2009, Haracska, Unk et al. 2002, Bi et al. 2006). POLK and POLZ cooperate in the elongation of nucleotides inserted opposite to lesioned bases by POLK. Similarly to POLZ, POLK has low processivity and is error-prone (Ohashi et al. 2000, Haracska, Prakash et al. 2002, Yoon et al. 2010).
R-HSA-110312	Translesion synthesis by REV1	REV1 (hREV1) encodes a template-dependent dCMP transferase that can insert a C residue opposite an abasic site (Lin et al. 1999, Gibbs et al. 2000). Interaction with monoubiquitinated PCNA at a DNA damage site enhances REV1-mediated translesion synthesis (TLS) (Garg and Burgers 2005, Wood et al. 2007). After REV1 incorporates dCMP opposite to the apurinic/apyrimidinic (AP) template site, TLS is continued by the DNA polymerase zeta complex (POLZ). POLZ consists of the catalytic subunit REV3L and the accessory subunit MAD2L2 (REV7). MAD2L2 binds REV1, thus recruiting POLZ to DNA damage site (Hara et al. 2010, Kikuchi et al. 2010, Xie et al. 1012). POLZ is error-prone and contributes to TLS-related mutagenesis (Shachar et al. 2009, Lee et al. 2014). POLZ has a low processivity and dissociates from the DNA template after incorporating less than 30 nucleotides (Nelson et al. 1996, Lee et al. 2014). 
R-HSA-110313	Translesion synthesis by Y family DNA polymerases bypasses lesions on DNA template	Ubiquitous environmental and endogenous genotoxic agents cause DNA lesions that can interfere with normal DNA metabolism including DNA replication, eventually resulting in mutations that lead to carcinogenesis and/or cell death. Cells possess repair mechanisms like nucleotide excision and base excision repair pathways to maintain the integrity of the genome. However, some types of lesions are repaired very inefficiently and others may not be recognized and repaired before the lesion-containing DNA undergoes DNA replication. To prevent acute cell death through arrested DNA replication at unrepaired lesions, cells have a mechanism, referred to as translesion synthesis (TLS), which allows DNA synthesis to proceed past lesions. TLS depends on the Y family of DNA polymerases (Lindahl and Wood 1999, Masutani et al. 2000, Yang 2014).
R-HSA-1445148	Translocation of GLUT4 to the plasma membrane	In adipocytes and myocytes insulin signaling causes intracellular vesicles carrying the GLUT4 (SLC2A4) glucose transporter to translocate to the plasma membrane, allowing the cells to take up glucose from the bloodstream (reviewed in Zaid et al. 2008, Leney and Tavare 2009, Bogan and Kandror 2010, Foley et al. 2011, Hoffman and Elmendorf 2011, Kandror and Pilch 2011). In myocytes muscle contraction alone can also cause translocation of GLUT4.<br>Though the entire pathway leading to GLUT4 translocation has not been elucidated, several steps are known. Insulin activates the kinases AKT1 and AKT2. Muscle contraction activates the kinase AMPK-alpha2 and possibly also AKT. AKT2 and, to a lesser extent, AKT1 phosphorylate the RAB GTPase activators TBC1D1 and TBC1D4, causing them to bind 14-3-3 proteins and lose GTPase activation activity. As a result RAB proteins (probably RAB8A, RAB10, RAB14 and possibly RAB13) accumulate GTP. The connection between RAB:GTP and vesicle translocation is unknown but may involve recruitment and activation of myosins.<br>Myosins 1C, 2A, 2B, 5A, 5B have all been shown to play a role in translocating GLUT4 vesicles near the periphery of the cell. Following docking at the plasma membrane the vesicles fuse with the plasma membrane in a process that depends on interaction between VAMP2 on the vesicle and SNAP23 and SYNTAXIN-4 at the plasma membrane.
R-HSA-202430	Translocation of ZAP-70 to Immunological synapse	The dual phosphorylated ITAMs recruit Syk kinase ZAP-70 via their tandem SH2 domains (step 4). ZAP-70 subsequently undergoes phosphorylation on multiple tyrosine residues for further activation. ZAP-70 includes both positive and negative regulatory sites. Tyrosine 493 is a conserved regulatory site found within the activation loop of the kinase domain. This site has shown to be a positive regulatory site required for ZAP-70 kinase activity and is phosphorylated by Lck (step 5). This phosphorylation contributes to the active conformation of the catalytic domain. Later ZAP-70 undergoes trans-autophosphorylation at Y315 and Y319 (step 6). These sites appear to be positive regulatory sites. ZAP-70 achieves its full activation after the trans-autophosphorylation. Activated ZAP-70 along with Lck phosphorylates the multiple tyrosine residues in the adaptor protein LAT (step 7). 
R-HSA-112315	Transmission across Chemical Synapses	Chemical synapses are specialized junctions that are used for communication between neurons, neurons and muscle or gland cells. The synapse involves a pre-synaptic neuron and a post-synaptic neuron, muscle cell or glad cell. The pre and the post-synaptic cell are separated by a gap of 20nm called the synaptic cleft. The signals pass in a unidirection from pre-synaptic to post-synaptic. The pre-synaptic neuron communicates via the release of neurotransmitter which bind the receptors on the post-synaptic cell.
R-HSA-112307	Transmission across Electrical Synapses 	Electrical transmission across nerve cells is accomplished when the current generated in the upstream neuron spreads to the downstream neuron through a path of low electrical resistance. In neurons this is accomplished at gap junctions. Electrical synapses are found in neuronal tissue where the activity of neurons must be highly synchronized. The neurons responsible for hormone secretion from the mammalian hypothalamus are a class of highly synchronized electric neurons. Gap junctions connecting the presynaptic cell with the postsynaptic cell allow current generated in the presynaptic cell to flow directly into the postsynaptic cell. Transmission speed is dramatically increased in such a system. The junction itself is composed of two hemichannels, one each on the pre- and postsysnaptic cells. These channels are composed of members of the connexin family of proteins.
R-HSA-174362	Transport and synthesis of PAPS	PAPS (3'-phosphoadenosine-5'-phosphosulfate), which functions as a sulfate donor in the cell, is synthesized from sulfate and two molecules of ATP in a two-step process (Robbins & Lipmann 1958) catalyzed in vertebrates by a bifunctional enzyme (Venkatachalam et al. 1998). PAPS synthesis takes place in the cytosol, and it is either consumed there in the sulfonation of a variety of hormones and xenobiotics, or it is transported to the Golgi apparatus and consumed in the synthesis of proteoglycans like chondroitin sulfate. Two isoforms of the human bifunctional enzyme are known, mutations in one of which are associated with defects in proteoglycan biosynthesis (Girard et al. 1998, ul Haque et al. 1998).
R-HSA-190827	Transport of connexins along the secretory pathway	Connexins follow the classical secretory transport route from the ER to the plasma membrane: ER -> ERGIC -> Golgi -> TGN (Trans Golgi Network) -> PM (Plasma Membrane). All connexins assemble or oligomerize into hexameric connexons. The site of assembly varies and depends on Cx isoform, or cell type (see Koval et al., 2006).<br>Oligomerization of connexins has been observed during ER membrane insertion (Cx32), just after exit from the ER, in the ER-Golgi-intermediate compartment (Cx26) and inside the Trans-Golgi Network (Cx43) (Falk et al. 1997; Ahmad et al. 1999; Musil and Goodenough 1993; Diez et al. 1999). 
R-HSA-190872	Transport of connexons to the plasma membrane	Following connexon oligomerization, the hemichannels must be transported to the plasma membrane. This has been shown to occur in transport vesicles called "cargo containers". Most of post-Golgi cargo containers have a diameter of of 50- 200 nm (Lauf et al., 2002). Recently direct transport of connexins to GJ assembly sides has been described (Shaw et al., 2007). Besides microtuble-dependent trafficking, a microtubule-independent delivery pathway may exist as concluded from studies using the secretory transport inhibitor, Brefeldin A (Musil and Goodenough 1993; De Sousa et al. 1993; Laird et al. 1995).
R-HSA-804914	Transport of fatty acids	Long chain fatty acids (LCFAs) are involved in many cellular functions. They can be used as an important source of energy by skeletal muscle and heart tissues. Also, they are used in the production of hormones which can regulate inflammation, blood pressure, the clotting process, blood lipid levels and the immune response. Fatty acid transporter proteins (FATPs) are a family of proteins which mediate fatty acid uptake into cells when overexpressed. FATPs also possess enzymatic activity, the details of which are captured elsewhere. There are 6 human genes of the SLC27A family which encode for FATP1-6 (Stahl A, 2004; Gimeno RE, 2007). To date, only FATP1, 4 and 6 have demonstrable transporter function. Fatty acids with carbon chain lengths of more than 10 are the most likely substrates for these transporters.
R-HSA-159763	Transport of gamma-carboxylated protein precursors from the endoplasmic reticulum to the Golgi apparatus	The details of the vesicle-mediated transport of proteins from the endoplasmic reticulum to the Golgi apparatus will be annotated in a future release of Reactome.
R-HSA-425366	Transport of glucose and other sugars, bile salts and organic acids, metal ions and amine compounds	Hexoses like glucose, galactose and fructose serve as basic fuel molecules for eukaryotic cells. Indeed, glucose is the main energy source for mammalian cells. These sugars are unable to diffuse across cellular membranes, and require transporter proteins for entry into and exit out of cells. Four gene families encode hexose transporter proteins (He et al, 2009). SLC2 family contains 14 genes and encode facilitative glucose transporters (GLUTs) (Uldry M and Thorens B, 2004). SLC5 family contains 12 genes and encode Na+/glucose symporters (Wright EM and Turk E, 2004). SLC37 family contains 4 members and encode sugar-phosphate/phosphate exchangers (Bartoloni L and Antonarakis SE, 2004). SLC45 family has 4 members and encode putative sugar/H+ symporters.
R-HSA-432030	Transport of glycerol from adipocytes to the liver by Aquaporins	Triglycerides stored in adipocytes are hydrolyzed to yield fatty acids and glycerol. The glycerol is passively transported out of the adipocyte and into the bloodstream by Aquaporin-7 (AQP7) located in the plasma membrane of adipocytes. Glycerol in the bloodstream is passively transported into liver cells by AQP9 located in the plasma membrane of hepatocytes. Once inside the liver cell the glycerol is a substrate for gluconeogenesis.
R-HSA-168874	Transport of HA trimer, NA tetramer and M2 tetramer from the endoplasmic reticulum to the Golgi Apparatus	Processed viral proteins are transported from the endoplasmic reticulum to the Golgi apparatus.
R-HSA-425393	Transport of inorganic cations/anions and amino acids/oligopeptides	Teleologically, one might argue that inorganic cation and anion transport would be evolutionarily among the oldest transport functions. Eight families comprise the group that transports exclusively inorganic cations and anions across membranes : SLC4 plays a pivotal role in mediating Na+ - and/or Cl- -dependent transport of basic anions [e.g. HCO3-, (CO3)2-] in various tissues and cell types (in addition to pH regulation, specific members of this family also contribute to vectorial trans-epithelial base transport in several organ systems including the kidney, pancreas, and eye) (Pushkin A and Kurtz I, 2006); SLC8 is a group of Na+/Ca2+ exchangers (SLC8A1 is involved in cardiac contractility) (Quednau BD et al, 2004); SLC24 is a group of Na+/Ca2+ or Na+/K+ exchangers (Altimimi HF and Schnetkamp PP, 2007); SLC9 comprises Na+/H+ exchanger proteins involved in the electroneutral exchange of sodium ion and protons (Orlowski J and Grinstein S, 2004); SLC12 functions as Na+, K+ and Cl- ion electroneutral symporters (Hebert SC et al, 2004); SLC26 is the trans-epithelial multifunctional anion (e.g. sulfate, oxalate, HCO-, Cl-) exchanger family, important in cartilage development, production of thyroid hormone, sound amplification in the cochlea etc (Sindic A et al, 2007; Dorwart MR et al, 2008; Ashmore J, 2008). SLC34 is an important Type II Na+/(HPO4)2- symporter (Forster IC et al, 2006; Virkki LV et al, 2007); SLC20 was originally identified as a viral receptor, and functions as a Type III Na+/(H2PO4)- symporter (Collins JF et al, 2004; Virkki LV et al, 2007). Eight SLC gene families are involved in the transport of amino acids and oligopeptides.
R-HSA-159236	Transport of Mature mRNA derived from an Intron-Containing Transcript	Transport of mRNA from the nucleus to the cytoplasm, where it is translated into protein, is highly selective and closely coupled to correct RNA processing. This coupling is achieved by the nuclear pore complex, which recognizes and transports only completed mRNAs.
R-HSA-159231	Transport of Mature mRNA Derived from an Intronless Transcript	Transport of mRNA from the nucleus to the cytoplasm, where it is translated into protein, is highly selective and closely coupled to correct RNA processing.
R-HSA-159234	Transport of Mature mRNAs Derived from Intronless Transcripts	Transport of mature mRNAs derived from intronless transcripts require some of the same protein complexes as mRNAs derived from intron containing complexes, including TAP and Aly/Ref. However a number of the splicing related factors are lacking from the intronless derived mRNAs, as they required no splicing.
R-HSA-72202	Transport of Mature Transcript to Cytoplasm	Transport of mRNA through the Nuclear Pore Complex (NPC) is a dynamic process involving distinct machinery and receptor subsets. The separation of the two compartments and the regulation of this transport provide spatial and temporal control over mRNA expression and ultimately control over translation. It should be noted that mRNA export does not rely on a specific motif in the mRNA molecule, but rather transport appears to be coupled to processing and regulation. The specific proteins that are bound to the mRNA determine when it will be transported to the cytoplasm. This limitation insures that transport overwhelmingly favors transport of fully processed mRNA molecules.
R-HSA-83936	Transport of nucleosides and free purine and pyrimidine bases across the plasma membrane	Two families of transport proteins mediate the movement of nucleosides and free purine and pyrimidine bases across the plasma membrane. Equilibrative nucleoside transporters allow the movement of these molecules along concentration gradients into or out of cells (Baldwin et al. 2003); concentrative nucleoside transporters actively transport nucleosides into cells by coupling their transport to the inward movement of sodium ions (Gray et al. 2003).<P>Of the four human equilibrative nucleoside transporters, two are well characterized. SLC29A1 (solute carrier family 29 (nucleoside transporters), member 1) mediates the transport of nucleosides across the plasma membrane. SLC29A2 (solute carrier family 29 (nucleoside transporters), member 2) mediates the transport of both nucleosides and free bases. Transporter specificities were determined by expressing cloned human genes in Xenopus oocytes or in mammalian cultured cell lines whose own nucleotide transporters had been disrupted by mutation. These studies establish that the transport processes are specific and saturable, and that the multiple nucleotides and bases compete for a single binding site on each transporter. Some features of SLC29A2 specificity are complex. For example, in the Xenopus oocyte system, radiolabeled uracil and adenine are taken up, and an excess of either molecule inhibits uptake of radiolabeled hypoxanthine, while in the cultured mammalian cell system, neither adenine nor uracil can inhibit uptake of radiolabeled uridine. If these results reflect ENT2 function in vivo, they indicate that the net movement of a nucleoside or base across the cell membrane is determined not only by its own concentrations in the extracellular space and the cytosol, but also by the concentrations of the other nucleosides and bases competing for access to the transporter.<P>The human genome encodes three concentrative transporters, SLC28A1, 2, and 3 (solute carrier family 28 (sodium-coupled nucleoside transporter), member 1, 2, and 3). All three genes have been cloned, and expression of the human proteins in Xenopus oocytes has allowed their transport properties to be determined. SLC28A1 mediates the uptake of pyrimidine nucleosides and adenosine (Ritzel et al. 1997); SLC28A2 the uptake of purine nucleosides and uridine (Wang et al. 1997); and SLC28A3 the uptake of purine and pyrimidine nucleosides (Ritzel et al. 2001). Amino acid sequence motifs that determine the specificities of these transporters have been identified in studies of chimeric and mutant proteins (Loewen et al. 1999). SLC28A3 protein co-transports two sodium ions per nucleoside; SLC28A1 and 2 transport one sodium per nucleoside (Ritzel et al. 2001).<P>Physiological roles for nucleoside and base transport include provision of nucleosides to cells with little capacity to synthesize these molecules de novo, and regulation of extracellular levels of adenosine, which is released from muscle during intense exercise and has signaling properties. In kidney and intestinal epithelia, the combination of apically localized CNT transporters and basolaterally localized ENT transporters provides a mechanism for net transport of nucleosides (Mangravite et al. 2003). These transporters also mediate the uptake of nucleoside analogs used clinically as anti-viral and anti-tumor drugs.<P>Orthologs of human concentrative and equilibrative transporter proteins have been identified in many eukaryotes, but functional studies of transporters even from organisms closely related to humans (e.g. rat, Gerstin et al. 2002) have revealed differences in substrate specificities. Prediction of drug uptake and other functions of these molecules by human - model organism orthology is thus risky.
R-HSA-727802	Transport of nucleotide sugars	Nucleotide sugars are used as sugar donors by glycosyltransferases to create the sugar chains for glycoconjugates such as glycoproteins, polysaccharides and glycolipids. Glycosyltransferases reside mainly in the lumen of the Golgi apparatus and endoplasmic reticulum (ER) whereas nucleotide sugars are synthesized in the cytosol. The human solute carrier family SLC35 encode nucleotide sugar transporters (NSTs) which can mediate the antiport of nucleotide sugars in exchange for the corresponding nucleoside monophosphates (eg. UMP for UDP-sugars). Owing to their function, NSTs are primarily located on Golgi and ER membranes (He L et al, 2009; Handford M et al, 2006; Ishida N and Kawakita M, 2004).
R-HSA-879518	Transport of organic anions	Organic anion transporting polypeptides (OATPs) are membrane transport proteins that mediate the sodium-independent transport of a wide range of amphipathic organic compounds including bile salts, steroid conjugates, thyroid hormones, anionic oligopeptides and numerous drugs (Hagenbuch B and Meier PJ, 2004).
R-HSA-168271	Transport of Ribonucleoproteins into the Host Nucleus	An unusual characteristic of the influenza virus life cycle is its dependence on the nucleus. Trafficking of the viral genome into and out of the nucleus is a tightly regulated process with all viral RNA synthesis occurring in the nucleus. The eight influenza virus genome segments never exist as naked RNA but are associated with four viral proteins to form viral ribonucleoprotein complexes (vRNPs). The major viral protein in the RNP complex is the nucleocapsid protein (NP), which coats the RNA. The remaining proteins PB1, PB2 and PA bind to the partially complementary ends of the viral RNA, creating the distinctive panhandle structure. These RNPs (10-20nm wide) are too large to passively diffuse into the nucleus and therefore, once released from an incoming particle must rely on the active import mechanism of the host cell nuclear pore complex. All proteins in the RNP complex can independently localize to the nucleus due to the presence of nuclear localization signals (NLSs) which mediate their interaction with the nuclear import machinery, including the RanGTPase (Fodor, 2004; Deng et al., 2006). However the signals on NP have been shown to be both sufficient and necessary for the import of viral RNA.
R-HSA-159230	Transport of the SLBP Dependant Mature mRNA	Transport of U7 snRNP and stem-loop binding protein (SLBP) processed mRNA.
R-HSA-159227	Transport of the SLBP independent Mature mRNA	Transport of the SLBP independent Mature mRNA through the nuclear pore.
R-HSA-425397	Transport of vitamins, nucleosides, and related molecules	This pathway groups the processes mediated by SLC transporters, by which vitamins and cofactors, as well as nucleosides, nucleotides, nucleobases, and related molecules cross lipid bilayer membranes.
R-HSA-948021	Transport to the Golgi and subsequent modification	At least two mechanisms of transport of proteins from the ER to the Golgi have been described. One is a general flow requiring no export signals (Wieland et al, 1987; Martinez-Menarguez et al, 1999). The other is mediated by LMAN1/MCFD2, mannose-binding lectins that recognize a glycan signal (Zhang B et al, 2003).
R-HSA-2562578	TRIF-mediated programmed cell death	TLR3 and -4 trigger TRIF-dependent programmed cell death in various human and mouse cells (Kalai M et al. 2002; Han KJ et al. 2004; Kaiser WJ and Offermann MK 2005; Estornes Y et al. 2012; He S et al. 2011). Apoptosis is a prevalent form of programmed cell death and is mediated by the activation of a set of caspases. In addition to apoptosis, TLR3/TLR4 activation induces RIP3-dependent necroptosis. These two programmed cell-death pathways may suppress each other. When the caspase activity is impaired or inhibited, certain cell types switch the apoptotic death program to necroptosis in response to various stimuli (TNF, Fas, viral infection and other stress stimuli) (Kalai M et al. 2002; Weber A et al. 2010; Feoktistova M et al. 2011, Tenev et al 2011).
R-HSA-937061	TRIF-mediated TLR3/TLR4 signaling 	TRIF(TICAM1) was shown to induce IRF3/7 and NF-?B activation and apoptosis through distinct intracellular signaling pathways [Han KJ et al 2004; Kaiser WJ and Offermann MK et al 2005]. TRIF consists of an N-terminal region (1-234), a TIR domain (235-500), and a C-terminal region (501-680).<p> The N-terminal region of TRIF harbors TRAF (TNF receptor associated factor) family proteins and forms complexes containing IRF-3 and/or NFkB -activating kinases. The C-terminal region of TRIF can recruit receptor-interacting protein-1 (RIP-1), and this event is followed by the activation of IKK complex.
R-HSA-75109	Triglyceride Biosynthesis	The overall process of triglyceride (triacylglycerol) biosynthesis consists of four biochemical pathways: fatty acyl-CoA biosynthesis, conversion of fatty acyl-CoA to phosphatidic acid, conversion of phosphatidic acid to diacylglycerol, and conversion fo diacylglycerol to triacylglycerol.
R-HSA-450513	Tristetraprolin (TTP, ZFP36) binds and destabilizes mRNA	Tristetraproline (TTP) binds RNAs that contain AU-rich elements and recruits enzymes that degrade RNA. TTP interacts with the exosome (3' to 5' exonuclease), XRN1 (5' to 3' exonuclease), and the decapping enzymes DCP1 and DCP2a.<br>The activity of TTP is regulated by phosphorylation. MK2 phosphorylates TTP, which then binds 14-3-3.The interaction with 14-3-3 prevents phosphorylated TTP from entering stress granules and stabilizes mRNA bound by phosphorylated TTP. Tristetraproline is known to bind AU-rich elements in the following mRNAs: Tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNFA), Granulocyte-macrophage colony stimulating factor (CSF2, GM-CSF), Interleukin-2 (IL-2), and Proto-oncogene C-FOS (FOS, c-fos). Mice deficient in TTP exhibit arthritis, weight loss, skin lesions, autoimmunity, and myeloid hyperplasia.
R-HSA-187042	TRKA activation by NGF	Neurotrophin functions are mediated by binding of the secreted neurotrophin homodimers to their common neurotrophin receptor p75NTR, and to their cognate tropomyosin related kinase (TRK) receptor. NGF binds to TRKA, BDNF and NT4 bind to TRKB, NT3 binds to TRKC. A tri-molecular signalling complex (NGF-p75NTR-TRKA) might also be possible.
R-HSA-379724	tRNA Aminoacylation	tRNA synthetases catalyze the ligation of tRNAs to their cognate amino acids in an ATP-dependent manner. The reaction proceeds in two steps. First, amino acid and ATP form an aminoacyl adenylate molecule, releasing pyrophosphate. The aminoacyl adenylate remains associated with the synthetase enzyme where, in the second step it reacts with tRNA to form aminoacyl tRNA and AMP. The rapid hydrolysis of pyrophosphate makes these reactions essentially irreversible under physiological conditions (Fersht and Kaethner 1976a). Specificity of the tRNA charging reactions is achieved both by specific recognition of amino acid and tRNA substrates by the synthetase, and by an editing process in which incorrect aminoacyl adenylate molecules (e.g., valyl adenylate associated with isoleucyl tRNA synthetase) are hydrolyzed rather than conjugated to tRNAs in the second step of the reaction (Baldwin and Berg 1966a,b; Fersht and Kaethner 1976b). The tRNA synthetases can be divided into two structural classes based on conserved amino acid sequence features (Burnbaum and Schimmel 1991).<p>A single synthetase mediates the charging of all of the tRNA species specific for any one amino acid but, with three exceptions, glycine, lysine, and glutamine, the synthetase that catalyzes aminoacylation of mitochondrial tRNAs is encoded by a different gene than the one that acts on mitochondrial tRNAs. Both mitochondrial and cytosolic tRNA synthetase enzymes are encoded by genes in the nuclear genome.<p>A number of tRNA synthetases are known to have functions distinct from tRNA charging (reviewed by Park et al. 2005). Additionally, mutations in several of the tRNA synthetases, often affecting protein domains that are dispensable in vitro for aminoacyl tRNA synthesis, are associated with a diverse array of neurological and other diseases (Antonellis and Green 2008; Park et al. 2008). These findings raise interest into the role of these enzymes in human development and disease.<p> 
R-HSA-6782315	tRNA modification in the nucleus and cytosol	At least 92 distinct tRNA nucleotide base modifications have been found. The modifications are made post-transcriptionally by a large group of disparate enzymes located in the nucleus, cytosol, and mitochondria (reviewed in Boschi-Muller and Motorin 2013, Jackman and Alfonzo 2013, Gu et al. 2014, Helm and Alfonzo 2014, Li and Mason 2014). Modifications near the anticodon and near the 3' end affect interaction of the tRNA with ribosomes and tRNA synthetases, respectively, while modifications in other regions of the tRNA affect folding and stability of the tRNA (reviewed in Hou et al. 2015).
R-HSA-72306	tRNA processing	Genes encoding transfer RNAs (tRNAs) are transcribed by RNA polymerase III in the nucleus and by mitochondrial RNA polymerase in the mitochondrion.<br>In the nucleus transcription reactions produce precursor tRNAs (pre-tRNAs) that have extra 5' leaders, 3' trailers, and, in some cases, introns which are removed by enzymes and enzyme complexes: RNase P cleaves the 5' leader, RNase Z cleaves the 3' trailer, TRNT1 polymerizes CCA onto the resulting 3' end, the TSEN complex cleaves at each end of the intron, and the tRNA ligase complex ligates the resulting exons (reviewed in Rossmanith et al. 1995, Phizicky and Hopper 2010, Suzuki et al. 2011, Abbott et al. 2014, Li and Mason 2014). The nucleotides within tRNAs undergo further chemical modifications such as methylation and deamination by a diverse set of enzymes (reviewed in Helm and Alfonzo 2014, Boschi-Muller and Motorin 2013). The order of events for each tRNA is not fully known and the understanding of the overall process is complicated by the retrograde (cytosol to nucleus) transport of tRNAs.<br>In the mitochondrial matrix transcription produces long precursor RNAs, H strand transcripts and an L strand transcript, that are cleaved by mitochondrial RNase P (an entirely proteinaceous complex), ELAC2, and other nucleases to yield 12S rRNA, 16S rRNA, mRNAs, and pre-tRNAs lacking 3' CCA sequences (reviewed in Van Haute et al. 2015). TRNT1 polymerizes an untemplated CCA sequence onto the 3' ends of the pre-tRNAs and chemical modifications are made to several nucleotides in the tRNAs.
R-HSA-6784531	tRNA processing in the nucleus	Genes encoding transfer RNAs are transcribed in the nucleus by RNA polymerase III. (Distinct processes of transcription and processing also occur in mitochondria.) The initial transcripts, pre-tRNAs, contain extra nucleotides at the 5' end and 3' end. 6.3% (32 of 509) of human tRNAs also contain introns, which are located in the anticodon loop, 3' to the anticodon. The additional nucleotides are removed and a non-templated CCA sequence is added to the resulting 3' terminus by processing reactions in the nucleus and cytosol (reviewed in Nakanishi and Nureki 2005, Phizicky and Hopper 2010).<br>The order of processing and nucleotide modification events may be different for different tRNAs and its analysis is complicated by a retrograde transport mechanism that can import tRNAs from the cytosol back to the nucleus (retrograde movement, Shaheen and Hopper 2005, reviewed in Phizicky 2005). Generally, the 5' leader of the pre-tRNA is removed first by endonucleolytic cleavage by the RNase P ribonucleoprotein complex, which contains a catalytic RNA (RNA H1 in humans) and at least 10 protein subunits (reviewed in Jarrous 2002, Xiao et al. 2002, Jarrous and Gopalan 2010).<br>The 3' trailer is then removed by RNase Z activity, a single protein in humans (reviewed in Maraia and Lamichhane 2011). ELAC2 is a RNase Z found in both nucleus and mitochondria. ELAC1 is found in the cytosol and may also act as an RNase Z. Human tRNA genes do not encode the universal acceptor 3' terminus CCA, instead it is added post-transcriptionally by TRNT1, an unusual polymerase that requires no nucleic acid template (reviewed in Xiong and Steitz 2006, Hou 2010, Tomita and Yamashita 2014).<br>In humans introns are spliced from intron-containing tRNAs in the nucleus by a two step mechanism that is distinct from mRNA splicing (reviewed in Popow et al. 2012, Lopes et al. 2015). The TSEN complex first cleaves 5' and 3' to the intron, generating a 2'3' cyclic phosphate on the 5' exon and a 5' hydroxyl group on the 3' exon. These two ends are ligated by a complex containing at least 6 proteins in a single reaction that both hydrolyzes the 2' phosphate bond and joins the 3' phosphate to the 5' hydroxyl. (In yeast the ligation and the hydrolysis of the 2' phosphate are separate reactions. The splicing reactions in yeast occur in the cytosol at the mitochondrial outer membrane.) <br>Mature transfer RNAs contain a large number of modified nucleotide residues that are produced by post-transcriptional modification reactions (reviewed in Li and Mason 2014). Depending on the specific tRNA these reactions may occur before or after splicing and before or after export from the nucleus to the cytosol.
R-HSA-3295583	TRP channels	Transient receptor potential (TRP) channel proteins were first discovered in Drosophila melanogaster and have many homologues in other species including humans. TRPs form cationic channels that can detect sensory stimuli such as temperature, pH or oxidative stress and transduce that into either electrical (change in membrane potential) or chemical signals (change in intracellular Ca2+ concentration). In humans, there are 28 TRP genes arranged into 6 subfamilies; TRPA, TRPC, TRPM, TRPML, TRPP, and TRPV (Wu et al. 2010). Each TRP channel subunit consists of six putative transmembrane-spanning segments (S1-S6) with a pore-forming loop between S5 and S6. These subunits assemble into tetramers to form functional channels. All functionally characterized TRP channels are permeable to Ca2+ except TRMP4 and 5 which are only permeable to monovalent cations such as Na+ (Latorre et al. 2009). Most TRPs can cause channelopathies which are risk factors for many disease states (Nilius & Owsianik 2010).
R-HSA-4839744	truncated APC mutants destabilize the destruction complex	APC is a large and central component of the destruction complex, which limits signaling in the absence of WNT ligand by promoting the ubiquitin-mediated degradation of beta-catenin. APC interacts with numerous components of the destruction complex, including AXINs (AXIN1 and AXIN2), GSK3s (GSK3alpha and GSK3beta), CK1, PP2A and beta-catenin, and these interactions are critical for the phosphorylation and degradation of beta-catenin (reviewed in Saito-Diaz et al, 2013). APC is itself the target of phosphorylation and K63 ubiquitination in the absence of WNT signaling and these modifications are required for its interactions with other components of the destruction complex (Tran and Polakis, 2012; Ha et al, 2004; reviewed in Stamos and Weis, 2013).<br><br>More than 85% of sporadic and hereditary colorectal tumors carry loss-of-function mutations in APC. Most of the mutations are frameshifts and result in truncated proteins that lack the SAMP motifs and the 15 and 20 aa repeats that are implicated in binding AXIN and regulating beta-catenin binding and degradation (Miyoshi et al, 1992; Nagase and Nakamura, 1993; reviewed in Segditas and Tomlinson, 2006). Cancers expressing truncated APC have high levels of cytoplasmic beta-catenin and deregulated expression of WNT target genes (Korinek et al, 1997). Approximately 15% of the colorectal tumors with wild-type APC harbor phosphodegron mutations of beta-catenin; interestingly, mutations in APC and beta-catenin are mutually exclusive events. Similar to APC-mutant tumors, beta-catenin is stabilized in these tumors and constitutive WNT target activation is detected (Morin et al, 1997; reviewed in Polakis, 2000).<br><br>
R-HSA-5467348	Truncations of AMER1 destabilize the destruction complex	AMER1/WTX is a known component of the destruction complex and interacts directly with beta-catenin through the C-terminal half (Major et al, 2007). siRNA depletion of AMER1 in mammalian cells stabilizes cellular beta-catenin levels and increases the expression of a beta-catenin-dependent reporter gene, suggesting that AMER1 is a tumor suppressor gene (Major et al, 2007; reviewed in Huff, 2011). Consistent with this, nonsense and missense mutations that truncate AMER1 and result in loss of the beta-catenin binding region have been identified in Wilms tumor, a pediatric kidney cancer (Ruteshouser et al, 2008; Wegert et al, 2009).
R-HSA-71240	Tryptophan catabolism	Tryptophan is catabolized in seven steps to yield aminomuconate. Intermedistes in this process are used as well for the synthesis of serotonin and kynurenine (Peters 1991).
R-HSA-1299503	TWIK related potassium channel (TREK)	TREK1 and TREK 2 are activated by physiochemical changes like stretch, convex deformation of the plasma membrane, depolarization, heat and intracellular acidosis. Polyunsaturated fatty acids (PUFA) including arachidonic acid open TREK channels.
R-HSA-1299361	TWIK-related alkaline pH activated K+ channel (TALK)	TWIK related alkaline pH activated K+ channels are activated by increase in the extracellular pH. TALK1 and TALK 2 are members of the TALK subfamily and are both are activated by rise in extracellular pH. TALK 2 is expressed in proximal tubule cells and collecting duct cells. TASK 2 is involved in the resorption of bicarbonate.
R-HSA-1299344	TWIK-related spinal cord K+ channel (TRESK)	TRESK subfamily of tandem domain K+ channels has one only member. TRESK is regulated by Ca/calmodulin dependent protein phosphatase, calcineurin.
R-HSA-1299316	TWIK-releated acid-sensitive K+ channel (TASK)	TASK 1 and 3 are closely related both structurally and functionally. TASK1 and TASK3 are activated by extracellular acidification and inhibited by decrease in pH. TASK 1 and Task 3 form functional homodimers and heterodimers, however the biophysical properties of TAS1 and TASK3 heteromers are different form parent subunit properties.
R-HSA-446107	Type I hemidesmosome assembly	Hemidesmosomes (HDs) are specialized multiprotein junctional complexes that connect the keratin cytoskeleton of epithelial cells to the extracellular matrix and play a critical role in the maintenance of tissue structure and integrity (reviewed in Litjens et al., 2006). HDs mediate adhesion of epithelial cells to the underlying basement membrane in stratified squamous, transitional and pseudostratified epithelia (Jones et al., 1994 ; Borradori and Sonnenberg, 1996). Classical Type I HDs are found in stratified and pseudo-stratified epithelia, such as the skin, and contain a6b4, plectin, tetraspanin CD151 and the bullous pemphigoid (BP) antigens BP180 and BP230 (reviewed in Litjens et al., 2006). While HDs function in promoting stable adhesion, they are highly dynamic structures that are able to disassemble quickly, for example, during cell division, differentiation, or migration (see Margadant et al, 2008).
R-HSA-427589	Type II Na+/Pi cotransporters	The SLC34 family of type II Na+/Pi cotransporters consist of three members; NaPi-IIa (SLC34A1), NaPi-IIb (SLC34A2) and NaPi-IIc (SLC34A3) (Murer H et al, 2004). They are expressed mainly in the kidney and small intestine, located at the apical sites of epithelial cells although other areas of the body express them to a lesser extent. NaPi-IIa and b cotransports divalent Pi (HPO4[2-]) with three Na+ ions (electrogenic transport) whereas NaPi-IIc cotransports divalent Pi with two Na+ ions (electroneutral transport).
R-HSA-2142789	Ubiquinol biosynthesis	The length of the polyisoprenoid chain of ubiquinone aka coenzyme Q (Q), varies depending on the species involved: it is 6 in budding yeast, Saccharomyces cerevisiae, (Q6) and 10 in humans (Q10). Most ubiquinone is naturally reduced to ubiquinol (Q10H2 in humans) and it is this form which dominates in most human tissues. It functions as an ubiquitous coenzyme in redox reactions and its ability both to associate with complexes I and III of the electron transport chain and to move freely in the inner mitochondrial membrane are central to its role in electron transport. In eukaryotes ubiquinones/ubiquinols are also found in other membranes such as the endoplasmic reticulum, Golgi vesicles, lysosomes and peroxisomes.<br><br>Ubiquinol/ubiquinone is synthesized in the following way. Initially, the polyisoprenoid tail is assembled by a polyprenyl diphosphate synthase. Next, 4 hydroxybenzoate polyprenyltransferase (COQ2) catalyses the formation of the covalent linkage between the benzoquinone head group and the tail to produce 4 hydroxy 3 polyprenyl benzoic acid intermediate (DHB, 3 decaprenyl 4 hydroxybenzoic acid in humans). There follows modifications of the aromatic ring starting with hydroxylation, followed by O methylation, and decarboxylation to form the 2 methoxy 6 polyprenyl phenol intermediate (DMPhOH ; 2 methoxy 6 decaprenylphenol in humans). Following this, two additional methylations, one C methylation, and one O methylation step, finally generate the fully substituted hydroquinone, ubiquinol (Szkopinska 2000, Kagan & Quinn 2000, Tran & Clarke 2007, Kawamukai 2009). 
R-HSA-69601	Ubiquitin Mediated Degradation of Phosphorylated Cdc25A	cdc25A protein is degraded by the ubiquitin-proteasome machinery in both terminally differentiating and cycling cells (Bernardi et al. 2000).
R-HSA-75815	Ubiquitin-dependent degradation of Cyclin D	Cyclin D turnover is regulated by ubiquitination and proteasomal degradation which are positively regulated by cyclin D phosphorylation on threonine-286 (Diehl et al., 1997).
R-HSA-69229	Ubiquitin-dependent degradation of Cyclin D1	After the Cyclin D serves the role of mediating reactions by Cdk4 and Cdk6, it is shuttled to the cytoplasm and degraded in a ubiquitin-dependent manner. Whether Cdk4 and Cdk6 are truly redundant is a topic still under investigation, although both the kinases are required for normal cell cycle progression.<p>Destruction of the D type cyclins accompanies the end of the G1 phase, and the E type cyclins are involved in transition of the cell from G1 to S phase. 
R-HSA-438066	Unblocking of NMDA receptor, glutamate binding and activation	At resting membrane potential the NMDA receptor is blocked by extracellular Mg2+ ions and therefore is not activated in this state by ligands (glutamate, glycine, NMDA). The voltage block is removed upon depolarization of the post-synaptic cell membrane by the influx of Na+ and efflux of K+ from the cell, Mg2+ is expelled from the NMDA receptor can now be activated by the ligands. The depolarization of the membrane maybe due to activation of Ca2+ impermeable AMPA receptors, which facilitates Na+ influx, contributing to the unblocking of NMDA receptors.
R-HSA-5602415	UNC93B1 deficiency - HSE	UNC93B1 is an endoplasmic reticulum protein with 12 membrane-spanning domains. Signaling cascades of nucleotide-sensing endosomal toll like receptors (TLR3 and TLR7-9) depends on functional UNC93B1, which is thought to deliver these TLRs from the ER to the endosome where they recognize specific pathogenic patterns and initiate host immune responses.<p>UNC93B deficiency has been implicated in the increased susceptibility to herpes simplex virus type 1 (HSV1) encephalitis (HSE), a rare complication during HSV-1 infection of the central nervous system (CNS) (Casrouge A et al. 2006). Patients-derived UNC96B1-deficient fibroblasts showed an impaired production of IFN-beta and -gamma following stimulation with TLR3 agonist poly(I:C) (Casrouge A et al. 2006). These cells were also more susceptible to HSV1 infection, showing rapid viral replication together with high mortality rates. Furthermore, pluripotent stem cells (iPSC) derived from HSE patient dermal fibroblasts were differentiated into populations of neural stem cells (NSC), neurons, astrocytes and oligodendrocytes (Lafaille FG et al. 2012). The impaired induction of IFN beta and gamma was observed in all tested CNS cells upon stimulation with poly(I:C). However, HSV1 infection selectively affected type I and III IFN production in UNC93B1-deficient neurons and oligodendrocytes (Lafaille FG et al. 2012). Thus, impaired TLR3-mediated UNC93B-dependent type I and III IFN production in respose to HSV1 infection in CNS, in neurons and oligodendrocytes in particular, may underline the pathogenesis of HSE in patients with UNC93B1 deficiency (Casrouge A et al. 2006; Lafaille FG et al. 2012).<p>Defective UNC93B1 also impairs the TLR7, TLR8 and TLR9 signaling pathways. Peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) from UNC93B-deficient patients did not respond to the stimulation of TLR7, TLR8, or TLR9, in terms of the production of type I and III interferons, and other cytokines tested (Casrouge A et al. 2006). Moreover, no inducible CD62L shedding on granulocytes was detected after stimulation of whole blood cells derived from UNC93B-deficients patients with R-848 (agonist of TLR7 and TLR8) (von Bernuth H. et al. 2008). However, no clinical condition has been so far associated with impaired TLR7, TLR8, TLR9 due to UNC93B1 deficiency so this defect is not annotated here.
R-HSA-162585	Uncoating of the HIV Virion	HIV-1 uncoating is a poorly understood process. It likely involves a progressive and partial dissembly of matrix and capsid layers. While viral proteins like MA and Nef are thought to be involved, the primary cause seems to be the cytosolic pH and a simple dilution effect. Successful uncoating generates the viral reverse transcription complex, which comprises the diploid viral RNA genome, tRNALys primer, RT, IN, MA, nucleocapsid (NC), viral protein R (Vpr) and various host proteins; the reverse-transcription complex is thus liberated from the plasma membrane. It is believed that the transiting viral nucleoprotein complex associates with the elements of cytoskeleton like actin microfilaments.
R-HSA-168336	Uncoating of the Influenza Virion	The precise timing and location of uncoating (early vs. late endosomes) depends on the pH-mediated transition of the specific viral hemagglutinin (HA) molecule involved. The uncoating of influenza viruses in endosomes is blocked by changes in pH caused by weak bases (e.g. ammonium chloride and chloroquine) or ionophores (e.g. monensin). Effective uncoating is also dependent on the presence of the viral M2 ion channel protein. Early on it was recognized that amantadine and rimantadine inhibit replication immediately following virus infection. Later it was found that the virus-associated M2 protein allows the influx of H+ ions into the virion, which disrupts protein-protein interactions, resulting in the release of viral RNP free of the viral matrix (M1) protein. Amantadine and rimantadine have been shown to block the ion channel activity of the M2 protein and thus uncoating. The HA mediated fusion of the viral membrane with the endosomal membrane and the M2-mediated release of the RNP results in the appearance of free RNP complexes in the cytosol. This completes the uncoating process. The time frame for the uncoating process has been examined by inhibiting virus penetration with ammonium chloride. Typically, virus particles show a penetration half time of about 25 minutes after viral adsorption. Ten minutes later (half time of 34 minutes after adsorption) RNP complexes are found in the nucleus. Uptake of RNP molecules through nuclear pores is an active process, involving the nucleo-cytoplasmic trafficking machinery of the host cell.
R-HSA-381119	Unfolded Protein Response (UPR)	The Unfolded Protein Response (UPR) is a regulatory system that protects the Endoplasmic Reticulum (ER) from overload. The UPR is provoked by the accumulation of improperly folded protein in the ER during times of unusually high secretion activity. Analysis of mutants with altered UPR, however, shows that the UPR is also required for normal development and function of secretory cells.<br>One level at which the URP operates is transcriptional and translational regulation: mobilization of ATF6 and IRE1 leads to increased transcription of genes encoding chaperones, and mobilization of PERK (pancreatic eIF2alpha kinase, EIF2AK3) leads to phosphorylation of the translation initiation factor eIF2alpha and global down-regulation of protein synthesis. These three regulatory pathways are annotated here.
R-HSA-176974	Unwinding of DNA	DNA Replication is regulated accurately and precisely by various protein complexes. Many members of the MCM protein family are assembled into the pre-Replication Complexes (pre-RC) at the end of M phase of the cell cycle. DNA helicase activity of some of the MCM family proteins are important for the unwinding of DNA and initiation of replication processes. This section contains four events which have been proved in different eukaryotic experimental systems to involve various proteins for this essential step during DNA Replication.
R-HSA-5339562	Uptake and actions of bacterial toxins	The toxic effects of many bacteria on their human hosts are mediated by proteins released from the bacteria that enter human cells and disrupt critical cellular functions (Henkel et al. 2010). All of the ones annotated here share a bipartiite mechanism of host intoxication: one moiety binds target cells and mediates the delivery of the other part to the intracellular compartment where it can function as an enzyme to degrade or derivatize and inactivate critical target cell proteins or to activate constitutive synthesis of high levels of cAMP.
R-HSA-5210891	Uptake and function of anthrax toxins	Bacillus anthracis bacteria target cells in an infected human through the action of three secreted bacterial proteins, LF, EF, and PA (reviews: Turk 2007; Young and Collier 2007). LF (lethal factor) is a protease that cleaves and inactivates many MAP2K (MAP kinase kinase, MEK) proteins (Duesbery et al. 1998; Vitale et al. 2000), disrupting MAP kinase signaling pathways. EF (edema factor) is an adenylate cyclase that mediates the constitutive production of cAMP (Leppla 1982), a molecule normally generated transiently in tightly regulated amounts in response to extracellular signals. Both LF and EF depend on PA (protective antigen) to enter their target cells, a strategy characteristic of bacterial binary toxins (Barth et al. 2004). PA binds to the target cell receptors, is cleaved by furin or other cellular proteases, and thereupon forms an oligomer that exposes binding sites for LF and EF molecules (review: Young and Collier 2007). This complex is taken into the target cell by clathrin mediated endocytosis and delivered to endosomes. The low pH of the endosome causes the bacterial toxin complex to rearrange: the PA oligomer forms a pore in the endosome membrane through which EF and LF molecules enter the target cell cytosol.
R-HSA-5336415	Uptake and function of diphtheria toxin	Diphtheria is a serious, often fatal human disease associated with damage to many tissues. Bacteria in infected individuals, however, are typically confined to the lining of the throat or to a skin lesion; systemic effects are due to the secretion of an exotoxin encoded by a lysogenic bacteriophage. The toxin is encoded as a single polypeptide but is cleaved by host furin-like proteases to yield an aminoterminal fragment A and a carboxyterminal fragment B, linked by a disulfide bond. Toxin cleavage can occur when it first contacts the target cell surface, as annotated here, or as late as the point at which fragment A is released into the cytosol. Fragment B mediates toxin uptake into target cell endocytic vesicles, where acidification promotes a conformational change enabling fragment B to form a channel in the vesicle membrane through which fragment A is extruded into the target cell cytosol. Cleavage of the inter-fragment disulfide bond frees DT fragment A, which catalyzes ADP ribosylation of the translation elongation factor 2 (EEF2) in a target cell, thereby blocking protein synthesis. Neither fragment is toxic to human cells by itself (Collier 1975; Pappenheim 1977; Murphy 2011).
R-HSA-70635	Urea cycle	The urea cycle yields urea, the major form in which excess nitrogen is excreted from the human body, and the amino acid arginine (Brusilow and Horwich 2001). It consists of four reactions: that of ornithine and carbamoyl phosphate to form citrulline, of citrulline and aspartate to form argininosuccinate, the cleavage of argininosuccinate to yield fumarate and arginine, and the cleavage of arginine to yield urea and re-form ornithine. The carbamoyl phosphate consumed in this cycle is synthesized in the mitochondria from bicarbonate and ammonia, and this synthesis in turn is dependent on the presence of N-acetylglutamate, which allosterically activates carbamoyl synthetase I enzyme. The synthesis of N-acetylglutamate is stimulated by high levels of arginine. Increased levels of free amino acids, indicated by elevated arginine levels, thus stimulate urea synthesis.<p>Two enzymes catalyze the hydrolysis of arginine to yield ornithine and urea. Cytosolic ARG1 is the canonical urea cycle enzyme. Mitochondrial ARG2 likewise catalyzes urea production from arginine and may have a substantial sparing effect in patients lacking ARG1 enzyme, so its reaction is annotated here although the role of ARG2 under normal physiological conditions remains unclear.
R-HSA-77108	Utilization of Ketone Bodies	The levels of acetone in ketone bodies are much lower than those of acetoacetic acid and beta-hydroxybutyric acid. Acetone cannot be converted back to acetyl-CoA, and is excreted in urine, or breathed out through the lungs. Extrahepatic tissues utilize ketone bodies by converting the beta-hydroxybutyrate successively to acetoacetate, acetoacetatyl-CoA, finally to acetyl-CoA (Sass 2011).
R-HSA-5619094	Variant SLC6A14 may confer susceptibility towards obesity	SLC6A14 mediates the uptake of multiple basic and nonpolar amino acids as well as beta-alanine across the plasma membrane. Uptake of one amino acid molecule is accompanied by uptake of two sodium ions and a chloride ion (Broer & Gether 2012, Schweikhard & Ziegler 2012). As assessed by Northern blotting, SLC6A14 is expressed at high levels in lung but only at low levels, if at all, in intestine or kidney. Variations in SLC6A14 may be associated with obesity (BMIQ11; MIM:300306) in some populations. SLC6A14 is an interesting candidate for obesity because it may potentially regulate tryptophan availability for serotonin synthesis and thus could affect appetite control (Suviolahti et al. 2003, Durand et al. 2004).
R-HSA-5619101	Variant SLC6A20 contributes towards hyperglycinuria (HG) and iminoglycinuria (IG)	SLC6A20 encodes the sodium- and chloride-dependent transporter SIT1 and mediates the sodium-dependent uptake of imino acids such as L-proline, N-methyl-L-proline and pipecolate as well as N-methylated amino acids and glycine (Broer & Gether 2012, Schweikhard & Ziegler 2012). The human protein is expressed in the intestine and kidney. A common SNP in the SLC6A20 gene, a 596C-T transition that results in a thr199-to-met (T199M) substitution can contribute towards iminoglycinuria (IG; MIM:242600) or hyperglycinuria (HG; MIM:138500) (Broer et al. 2008). Overall, mutations in SLC36A2 together with polymorphisms in the modifiers SLC6A20, SLC6A18, and SLC6A19 constitute the genetic basis for these phenotypes.
R-HSA-5660686	Variant SLC6A20 contributes towards hyperglycinuria (HG) and iminoglycinuria (IG)	SLC6A20 encodes the sodium- and chloride-dependent transporter SIT1 and mediates the sodium-dependent uptake of imino acids such as L-proline, N-methyl-L-proline and pipecolate as well as N-methylated amino acids and glycine (Broer & Gether 2012, Schweikhard & Ziegler 2012). The human protein is expressed in the intestine and kidney. A common SNP in the SLC6A20 gene, a 596C-T transition that results in a thr199-to-met (T199M) substitution can contribute towards iminoglycinuria (IG; MIM:242600) or hyperglycinuria (HG; MIM:138500) (Broer et al. 2008). Overall, mutations in SLC36A2 together with polymorphisms in the modifiers SLC6A20, SLC6A18, and SLC6A19 constitute the genetic basis for these phenotypes.
R-HSA-432040	Vasopressin regulates renal water homeostasis via Aquaporins	In the kidney water and solutes are passed out of the bloodstream and into the proximal tubule via the slit-like structure formed by nephrin in the glomerulus. Water is reabsorbed from the filtrate during its transit through the proximal tubule, the descending loop of Henle, the distal convoluted tubule, and the collecting duct.<br>Aquaporin-1 (AQP1) in the proximal tubule and the descending thin limb of Henle is responsible for about 90% of reabsorption (as estimated from mouse knockouts of AQP1). AQP1 is located on both the apical and basolateral surface of epithelial cells and thus transports water through the epithelium and back into the bloodstream.<br>In the collecting duct epithelial cells have AQP2 on their apical surface and AQP3 and AQP4 on their basolateral surface to transport water across the epithelium. The permeability of the epithelium is regulated by vasopressin, which activates the phosphorylation and subsequent translocation of AQP2 from intracellular vesicles to the plasma membrane.
R-HSA-388479	Vasopressin-like receptors	The vasopressins are peptide hormones consisting of nine amino acids (nonapeptides). They include arginine vasopressin (AVP; anti-diuretic hormone, ADH) and oxytocin. They are synthesized in the hypothalamus from a precursor and released from stores in the posterior pituitary into the blood stream. One of the most important roles of vasopressins is the regulation of water retention in the body. Oxytocin is important in uterine contraction during birth. The vasopressins act via AVP and oxytocin receptors. These are connected to G proteins which act as second messengers and convey the signal inside the cell.
R-HSA-195399	VEGF binds to VEGFR leading to receptor dimerization	The binding of VEGF ligands to VEGFR receptors in the cell membrane induces dimerization and activation of the latter, initiating intracellular signaling cascades that result in proliferation, survival, migration and increased permeability of vascular endothelial cells (Matsumoto and Mugishima, 2006). The receptors predominantly form homodimers but heterodimers between VEGFR-1 and -2 have been observed. Although both VEGFR-1 and -2 are expressed in the vascular endothelium, the angiogenic activities of VEGFs are transduced mainly through VEGFR-2 in vivo.
R-HSA-194313	VEGF ligand-receptor interactions	The VEGF family is encoded by seven genes (VEGF-A, B, C, D, E: PLGF (Placenta Growth Factor)-1, 2). Six isoforms of VEGF-A protein, containing 121, 145, 165, 183, 189, and 206 amino acid residues, and two isoforms of VEGF-B (167 and 186 residues) are specified by alternatively spliced mRNAs. The active form of each of these proteins is a homodimer.<br>The specificities of the three VEGF tyrosine kinase receptors, VEGFR-1, VEGFR-2 and VEGFR-3, for these ligands are shown in the figure (Hicklin and Ellis 2005). All VEGF-A isoforms bind both VEGFR-1 and VEGFR-2; PLGF-1 and -2, and VEGF-B isoforms bind only VEGFR-1; VEGF-E binds VEGFR-2; and VEGF-C and -D bind both VEGFR-2 and -3. VEGF-D undergoes a complex series of post-translational modifications that results in secreted forms with increased activity toward VEGFR-3 and VEGFR-2. <br>Two co-receptor proteins in the cell membrane, neuropilin (NRP)-1 and NRP-2, interact with VEGFR proteins to increase the affinity of the latter for their ligands (Neufeld et al.,2002). They differ from VEGFR proteins in not having intracellular signaling domains. 
R-HSA-4420097	VEGFA-VEGFR2 Pathway	Angiogenesis is the formation of new blood vessels from preexisting vasculature. One of the most important proangiogenic factors is vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF). VEGF exerts its biologic effect through interaction with transmembrane tyrosine kinase receptors VEGFR, selectively expressed on vascular endothelial cells. VEGFA signaling through VEGFR2 is the major pathway that activates angiogenesis by inducing the proliferation, survival, sprouting and migration of endothelial cells (ECs), and also by increasing endothelial permeability (Lohela et al. 2009, Shibuya & Claesson-Welsh 2006, Claesson-Welsh & Welsh, 2013). The critical role of VEGFR2 in vascular development is highlighted by the fact that VEGFR2-/- mice die at E8.5-9.5 due to defective development of blood islands, endothelial cells and haematopoietic cells (Shalaby et al. 1995).
R-HSA-5218921	VEGFR2 mediated cell proliferation	VEGFR2 stimulates ERK not via GRB2-SOS-RAS, but via pY1175-dependent phosphorylation of PLC gamma and subsequent activation of PKCs. PKC plays an important mediatory role in the proliferative Ras/Raf/MEK/ERK pathway. PKC alpha can intersect the Ras/Raf/MEK/ERK cascade at the level of Ras (Clark et al. 2004) or downstream of Ras through direct phosphorylation of Raf (Kolch et al. 1993). VEGF stimulation leads to Ras activation in a Ras-guanine nucleotide exchange factor (GEF) independent mechanism. It rather relies on modulating the regulation of Ras-GTPase activating protein (GAP) than regulation of Ras-GEFS (Wu et al. 2003).
R-HSA-5218920	VEGFR2 mediated vascular permeability	The free radical nitric oxide (NO), produced by endothelial NO synthase (eNOS), is an important vasoactive substance in normal vascular biology and pathophysiology. It plays an important role in vascular functions such as vascular dilation and angiogenesis (Murohara et al. 1998, Ziche at al. 1997). NO has been reported to be a downstream mediator in the angiogenic response mediated by VEGF, but the mechanism by which NO promotes neovessel formation is not clear (Babaei & Stewart 2002). Persistent vasodilation and increase in vascular permeability in the existing vasculature is observed during the early steps of angiogenesis, suggesting that these hemodynamic changes are indispensable during an angiogenic processes. NO production by VEGF can occur either through the activation of PI3K or through a PLC-gamma dependent manner. Once activated both pathways converge on AKT phosphorylation of eNOS, releasing NO (Lin & Sessa 2006). VEGF also regulates vascular permeability by promoting VE-cadherin endocytosis at the cell surface through a VEGFR-2-Src-Vav2-Rac-PAK signalling axis.
R-HSA-5653656	Vesicle-mediated transport	The transit of proteins and other cargo through the cell requires a cellular transport process in which transported substances are moved in membrane-bounded vesicles. Transported substances are enclosed in the vesicle lumen or located in the vesicle membrane. The transport process begins with the formation of the vesicle itself, often triggered by the interaction of the cargo with the vesicle formation machinery. Vesicular transport pathways can include vesicle formation, coating, budding, uncoating and target membrane fusion depending upon the function of the pathway described. Vesicle-mediated transport occurs from within cell via ER and Golgi transport, as well as functioning in the endocytosis of material taken into the cell via scavenger receptors.
R-HSA-180585	Vif-mediated degradation of APOBEC3G	The HIV-1 accessory protein Vif (Viral infectivity factor) is required for the efficient infection of primary cell populations (e.g., lymphocytes and macrophages) and 'non-permissive' cell lines. Vif neutralises the host DNA editing enzyme, APOBEC3G, in the producer cell. Indeed, in the absence of a functional Vif, APOBEC3G is selectively incorporated into the budding virions and in the next cycle of infection leads to the deamination of deoxycytidines (dC) within the minus-strand cDNA during reverse transcription (Sheehy et al 2003; Li et al., 2005 ; Stopak et al. 2003).<br>Deamination changes cytidine to uracil and thus results in G to A transitions and stop codons in the provirus. The aberrant cDNAs produced in the infected cell can either be integrated in form of non-functional proviruses or degraded. Vif counteracts the antiviral activity of APOBEC3G by associating directly with it and promoting its polyubiquitination and degradation by the 26S proteasome. <br>Vif binds APOBEC3G and recruits it into an E3 ubiquitin-enzyme complex composed by the cytoplasmic proteins Cullin5, Rbx, ElonginC and ElonginB (Yu et al., 2003) . Thus, in the presence of Vif, APOBEC3G incorporation into the virion is minimal.<br>
R-HSA-168325	Viral Messenger RNA Synthesis	Like the mRNAs of the host cell, influenza virus mRNAs are capped and polyadenylated (reviewed in Neumann, 2004). The methylated caps, however, are scavenged from host cell mRNAs and serve as primers for viral RNA synthesis, a process termed 'cap-snatching' (Krug, 1981; Hagen, 1994). The PB2 polymerase protein binds the cap, activating endonucleolytic cleavage of the host mRNA by PB1. The 3' poly-A tracts on viral messages are generated by polymerase stuttering on poly-U tracts near the 5' end of the template vRNA (Robertson, 1981; Zheng, 1999). The second process allows polyadenylation of viral mRNAs when the host cell polyadenylation process has been inhibited (Engelhardt, 2006; Amorim, 2006). Notably, early transcripts (including NP and NS1) accumulate in the cytoplasm before late transcripts (M1, HA, and NS2), and in varying abundances, suggesting additional control mechanisms regulating viral gene expression (Shapiro, 1987; Hatada, 1989; Amorim, 2006).
R-HSA-192823	Viral mRNA Translation	Spliced and unspliced viral mRNA in the cytoplasm are translated by host cell ribosomal translation machinery (reviewed in Kash, 2006). At least ten viral proteins are synthesized: HA, NA, PB1, PB2, PA, NP, NS1, NEP/NS2, M1, and M2. Viral mRNA translation is believed to be enhanced by conserved 5'UTR sequences that interact with the ribosomal machinery and at least one cellular RNA-binding protein, G-rich sequence factor 1 (GRSF-1), has been found to specifically interact with the viral 5' UTRs. (Park, 1995; Park, 1999). The viral NS1 protein and the cellular protein P58(IPK) enhance viral translation indirectly by preventing the activation of the translational inhibitor PKR (Salvatore, 2002; Goodman, 2006). The viral NS1 protein has also been proposed to specifically enhance translation through interaction with host poly(A)-binding protein 1 (PABP1) (Burgui, 2003). Simultaneously, host cell protein synthesis is downregulated in influenza virus infection through still uncharacterized mechanisms (Katze, 1986; Garfinkel, 1992; Kash, 2006). In most human influenza A strains (such as PR8), the PB1 mRNA segment is capable of producing a second protein, PB1-F2, from a short +1 open reading frame initiating downstream of the PB1 ORF initiation codon (Chen, 2001).
R-HSA-168330	Viral RNP Complexes in the Host Cell Nucleus	Viral RNP is assembled in the host cell nucleus through the interaction of full-length negative strand viral RNA (vRNA) and the viral nucleocapsid (NP) and matrix (M1) proteins. Studies of interactions of the purified components in vitro and of tissue culture model systems expressing various combinations of the components have established roles for both NP and M1 proteins in the assembly of a complex that has the physical properties of vRNP purified from virions and that can be exported from the host cell nucleus (Whittaker, 1996; Huang, 2001; Baudin, 2001). Viral RNP complexes have been found in the nucleoplasm, and also in the nuclear periphery, associated with the nuclear matrix or chromatin, particularly for vRNA-containing complexes and M1 protein (Elton, 2005; Garcia-Robles, 2005; Takizawa et al., 2006).
R-HSA-168268	Virus Assembly and Release	Influenza viruses assemble and bud from the apical plasma membrane of polarized cells e.g. lung epithelial cells of the infected host. This asymmetrical process (i.e. apical [Influenza virus] or basolateral [Marburg virus]) is thought to have an important role in viral pathogenesis and tissue tropism. In most cases the individual viral envelope proteins are seen to accumulate at the same polar surface from which virus budding occurs, suggesting that they determine the maturation site
R-HSA-2187338	Visual phototransduction	Visual phototransduction is the process by which photon absorption by visual pigment molecules in photoreceptor cells is converted to an electrical cellular response. The events in this process are photochemical, biochemical and electrophysiological and are highly conserved across many species. This process occurs in two types of photoreceptors in the retina, rods and cones. Each type consists of two parts, the outer segment which detects a photon signal and the inner segment which contains the necessary machinery for cell metabolism. Each type of cell functions differently. Rods are very light sensitive but their flash response is slow so they work best in twilight conditions but are not good at detecting objects moving quickly. Cones are less light-sensitive and have a fast flash response so they work best in daylight conditions and are better at detecting fast moving objects than rods.<br><br>The visual pigment consists of a chromophore (11-cis-retinal, 11cRAL, A1) covalently attached to a GPCR opsin family member. The linkage is via a Schiff base forming retinylidene protein. Upon photon absorption, 11cRAL isomerises to all-trans retinal (atRAL), changing the conformation of opsin to an activated form which can activate the regulatory G protein transducin (Gt). The alpha subunit of Gt activates phosphodiesterase which hydrolyses cGMP to 5'-GMP. As high level of cGMP keep cGMP-gated sodium channels open, the lowering of cGMP levels closes these channels which causes hyperpolarization of the cell and subsequently, closure of voltage-gated calcium channels. As calcium levels drop, the level of the neurotransmitter glutamate also drops causing depolarization of the cell. This effectively relays the light signal to postsynaptic neurons as electrical signal (Burns & Pugh 2010, Korenbrot 2012, Pugh & Lamb 1993).<br><br>11cRAL cannot be synthesised in vertebrates. Vitamin A from many dietary sources is the precursor for 11cRAL. It is taken from food in the form of esters such as retinyl acetate or palmitate or one of four caretenoids (alpha-carotene, beta-carotene, gamma-carotene and beta-cryptoxanthin). Retinoids are transported from the gut to be stored in liver, until required by target organs such as the eye (Harrison & Hussain 2001, Harrison 2005). In the eye, in the form 11cRAL, it is used in the retinoid (visual) cycle to initiate phototransduction and for visual pigment regeneration to ready the photoreceptor for the next phototransduction event (von Lintig 2012, Blomhoff & Blomhoff 2006, von Lintig et al. 2010, D'Ambrosio et al. 2011, Wang & Kefalov 2011, Kefalov 2012, Wolf 2004).
R-HSA-196819	Vitamin B1 (thiamin) metabolism	Vitamin B1 (thiamin) is found naturally in certain foodstuffs such as green peas, spinach, liver, bananas, whole grains and legumes. Human diseases associated with thiamin deficiency include beriberi, due to a thiamin-deficient diet, TMRA, due to defects in the SLC19A2 transport protein, and Wernicke-Korsakoff Syndrome, associated with thiamin deficiency in alcoholism (Haas 1988). Thiamin is water-soluble so is not stored in the body. When pyrophosphorylated, thiamin is converted into the coenzyme thiamin pyrophosphate (ThPP, codecarboxylase) which plays an essential role in oxidative decarboxylation and group transfer reactions.
R-HSA-196843	Vitamin B2 (riboflavin) metabolism	Riboflavin (vitamin B2, E101) is an essential component for the cofactors FAD (flavin-adenine dinucleotide) and FMN (flavin mononucleotide). Together with NAD+ and NADP+, FAD and FMN are important hydrogen carriers and take part in more than 100 redox reactions involved in energy metabolism. Riboflavin is present in many vegetables and meat and during digestion, various flavoproteins from food are degraded and riboflavin is resorbed. The major degradation and excretion product in humans is riboflavin (Rivlin 1970).
R-HSA-199220	Vitamin B5 (pantothenate) metabolism	Panthothenate (vitamin B5) is the precursor of coenzyme A (Robishaw and Neely 1985) and is the prosthetic group of acyl carrier protein (ACP) (Joshi et al. 2003). Its name is derived from the Greek pantothen meaning "from everywhere" and small quantities of pantothenic acid are found in nearly every foodstuff.
R-HSA-196836	Vitamin C (ascorbate) metabolism	Vitamin C (ascorbate) is an antioxidant and a cofactor in reactions catalyzed by Cu+-dependent monooxygenases and Fe++-dependent dioxygenases. Many mammals can synthesize ascorbate de novo; humans and other primates cannot due to an evolutionarily recent mutation in the gene catalyzing the last step of the biosynthetic pathway. Reactions annotated here mediate the uptake of ascorbate and its fully oxidized form, dehydroascorbate (DHA) by cells, and the reduction of DHA and monodehydroascorbate to regenerate ascorbate (Linster and Van Schaftingen 2007).
R-HSA-196791	Vitamin D (calciferol) metabolism	Vitamin D3 (cholecalciferol) is a steroid hormone that plays a role in regulating calcium and bone metabolism. It is obtained from the diet and produced in the skin by photolysis of 7-dehydrocholesterol and released into the bloodstream. Only a few food sources have significant amounts of vitamins D2 and D3 but many foodstuffs nowadays are fortified with vitamin D. The metabolites of vitamin D3 are carried in the circulation bound to a plasma protein called vitamin D binding protein (VDBP). Vitamin D3 undergoes two subsequent hydroxylations to form the active form of the vitamin, 1,25(OH)2 vitamin D3 (calcitriol). The first hydroxylation takes place in the liver and subsequent transport to the kidney allows the second hydroxylation. Calciferol acts by binding to nuclear vitamin D receptors.
R-HSA-211916	Vitamins	A number of CYPs can act upon vitamins.
R-HSA-964975	Vitamins B6 activation to pyridoxal phosphate	Animals cannot synthesize pyridoxal 5'-phosphate (PLP) which is a ligand in aminotransferases and other enzymes. PLP's accessible derivatives pyridoxine, pyridoxal, and pyridoxamine are traditionally called vitamins B6. They are taken up nutritionally from bacteria and plants, but also created from PLP in the body. The pathways used to recycle PLP from these three compounds can therefore be called vitamin B6 activation as well as PLP salvage. Because of the close similarity of the molecules, only two enzymes are needed for the task (McCormick & Chen, 1999).
R-HSA-1296072	Voltage gated Potassium channels	Voltage-gated K+ channels (Kv) determine the excitability of heart, brain and skeletal muscle cells. Kv form octameric channel with alpha subunits that forms the pore of the channel and associated beta subunits. The alpha subunits associate with beta subunits with a stoichiometry of alpha4beta4.The alpha subunits have been classified into 12 families, 1-12 with several representatives from each family. Members of Kv 1-4 form both homotetramers and heterotetramers, however, members of Kv 5-12 form functional heterotetramers. Kv's are expressed in the axon, at axon nodes, somatodendritic sites and axon termini.
R-HSA-180897	Vpr-mediated induction of apoptosis by mitochondrial outer membrane permeabilization	In one model of Vpr mediated induction of apoptosis, Vpr acts directly on the mitochondrial permeability transition pore complex through its interaction with adenine nucleotide translocator (ANT). This interaction promotes the permeabiliztion of the mitochondrial membranes resulting in the release of cytochrome c and apoptosis-inducing factors.
R-HSA-180910	Vpr-mediated nuclear import of PICs	Vpr appears to function in anchoring the PIC to the nuclear envelope. This anchoring likely involves interactions between Vpr and host nucleoporins.
R-HSA-180534	Vpu mediated degradation of CD4	The HIV-1 Vpu protein promotes the degradation of the CD4 receptor by recruiting an SCF like ubiquitination complex that promotes CD4 degradation. Vpu links beta-TrCP to CD4 at the ER membrane through interactions with beta-TrCP and the cytoplasmic tail of CD4. The SKP1 component of the SCF complex is then recruited to the Vpu:beta-TrCP:CD4 promoting ubiquitination and subsequent proteasome-mediated degradation of CD4 (reviewed in Li et al., 2005). Vpu has also been shown to also increases progeny virus secretion from infected cells. Although the precise role of Vpu in this process is not yet known, it may affect ion conductive membrane pore formation and/or interference with TASK-1, an acid-sensitive K+ channel that inhibits virion release in some cells (see references in Li et al., 2005).
R-HSA-192814	vRNA Synthesis	The synthesis of full-length negative strand viral RNA from a cRNA template is believed to follow the same principles as the synthesis of cRNA from a vRNA template. The cRNA, complexed with viral nucleocapsid (NP) protein, is used as template by the trimeric viral polymerase (Pritlove, 1995; Vreede, 2004; Crow, 2004), and newly synthesized vRNA molecules are immediately packaged with NP molecules to form ribonucleoprotein complexes (Vreede, 2004). There is some evidence that the production of vRNA-containing vRNP occurs in the nuclear matrix as well as the nucleoplasm (Takizawa, 2006).
R-HSA-192905	vRNP Assembly	For each of eight gene segments, a viral ribonucleoprotein (vRNP), containing a viral negative-sense RNA (vRNA) segment complexed with nucleoprotein (NP) and the trimeric influenza polymerase (PB1, PB2, and PA), is assembled in the nucleus (Braam, 1983; Jones, 1986; Cros, 2003; reviewed in Buolo, 2006). The vRNP functions in three modes (reviewed in Mikulasova, 2000; Neumann, 2004): (1) transcription, which synthesizes viral messenger RNA from the vRNA template using as primers 5' ends of cellular mRNAs containing the cap; (2) replication, which produces positive-sense complementary RNA (cRNA) and subsequently vRNA, both complexed with NP and the trimeric polymerase; or (3), the vRNP is exported from the nucleus into the cytoplasm and is incorporated into assembling virions at the plasma membrane.
R-HSA-5620916	VxPx cargo-targeting to cilium	A number of membrane proteins destined for the ciliary membrane are recognized by ARF4 in the trans-Golgi network, initiating the formation of a ciliary targeting complex that directs the passage of these cargo to the primary cilium (Mazelova et al, 2009; Geng et al, 2006; Jenkins et al, 2006; Ward et al, 2011; reviewed in Deretic, 2013). Although there is some support for the presence of a VxPx or related motif in the C-terminal tail of cargo destined for ARF4-mediated transport to the cilium, the details of this have not been definitively established and other ciliary targeting sequences have also been identified (reviewed in Deretic, 2013; Bhogaraju et al, 2013).
R-HSA-3238698	WNT ligand biogenesis and trafficking	19 WNT proteins have been identified in human cells. The WNTs are members of a conserved metazoan family of secreted morphogens that activate several signaling pathways in the responding cell: the canonical (beta-catenin) WNT signaling cascade and several non-canonical pathways, including the planar cell polarity (PCP), the regulation of intracellular calcium signaling and activation of JNK kinases. WNT proteins exist in a gradient outside the secreting cell and are able to act over both short and long ranges to promote proliferation, changes in cell migration and polarity and tissue homeostasis, among others (reviewed in Saito-Diaz et al, 2012; Willert and Nusse, 2012). <br><br><br>The WNTs are ~40kDa proteins with 23 conserved cysteine residues in the N-terminal that may form intramolecular disulphide bonds. They also contain an N-terminal signal sequence and a number of N-linked glycosylation sites (Janda et al, 2012). In addition to being glycosylated, WNTs are also lipid-modified in the endoplasmic reticulum by a WNT-specific O-acyl-transferase, Porcupine (PORCN), contributing to their characteristic hydrophobicity. PORCN-dependent palmitoylation is required for the secretion of WNT as well as its signaling activity, as either depletion of PORCN or mutation of the conserved serine acylation site results in the intracellular accumulation of WNT ligand (Takada et al, 2006; Barrott et al, 2011; Biechele et al, 2011; reviewed in Willert and Nusse, 2012).<br><br><br>Secretion of WNT requires a number of other dedicated factors including the sorting receptor Wntless (WLS) (also knownas Evi, Sprinter, and GPR177), which binds WNT and escorts it to the cell surface (Banziger et al, 2006; Bartscherer et al, 2006; Goodman et al, 2006). A WNT-specific retromer containing SNX3 is subsequently required for the recycling of WLS back to the Golgi (reviewed in Herr et al, 2012; Johannes and Wunder, 2011). Once at the cell surface, WNT makes extensive contacts with components of the extracellular matrix such as heparan sulphate proteoglycans (HSPGs) and may be bound by any of a number of regulatory proteins, including WIFs and SFRPs. The diffusion of the WNT ligand may be aided by its packing either into WNT multimers, exosomes or onto lipoprotein particles to shield the hydrophobic lipid adducts from the aqueous extracellular environment (Gross et al, 2012; Luga et al, 2012, Korkut et al, 2009; reviewed in Willert and Nusse, 2012).<br><br >
R-HSA-5340573	WNT ligand secretion is abrogated by the PORCN inhibitor LGK974	Aberrant WNT signaling is associated with the development of numerous cancers, and strategies for targeting this pathway are under intense investigation (reviewed in Polakis, 2012; Polakis, 2000; Yao et al, 2011). Secretion of WNT ligand depends on its PORCN-dependent palmitoleoylation in the ER, making PORCN a attractive therapeutic target in cases where WNT is aberrantly over-expressed (reviewed in MacDonald et al, 2009). LGK974 is a PORCN-inhibitor that was identified in a screen for compounds that abrogate the secretion of WNT ligands, and is in Phase I clinical trials for the treatment of WNT-dependent cancers (Liu et al, 2013)
R-HSA-201688	WNT mediated activation of DVL	The three human Dishevelled (DVL) proteins play a central and overlapping role in the transduction of the WNT signaling cascade (Lee et al, 2008; reviewed in Gao and Chen 2010). DVL activity is regulated by phosphorylation, although the details are not completely worked out. DVL likely exists as a phosphoprotein even in the absence of WNT stimulation, and is further phosphorylated upon ligand binding. Casein kinase 1epsilon (CSNK1E), casein kinase 2 (CSNK2) and PAR1 have all been reported to phosphorylate DVL (Willert et al, 1997; Sun et al, 2001; Cong et al, 2004; Ossipova et al, 2005). Upon pathway activation, phosphorylated DVL translocates to the plasma membrane through an interaction between the DVL PDZ domain and the FZD KTxxxW motif (Wong et al, 2003; Umbhauer et al, 2000; Kikuchi et al, 2011). At the plasma membrane, DVL is believed to oligomerize through its DIX domain, providing a platform for AXIN recruitment; recruitment of AXIN is also facilitated by interaction with LRP (Schwarz-Romond et al, 2007; Mao et al, 2001). DVL interacts with phosphatidylinositol-4-kinase type II (PI4KII) and phophatidylinositol-4-phosphate 5-kinase type I (PIP5KI) to promote formation of phosphatidylinositol 4,5-bisphosphate (PI(4,5)P2) in the membrane, which is required for the clustering and phosphorylation of LRP6 and the recruitment of AXIN (Pan et al, 2008; Qin et al, 2009).
R-HSA-5140745	WNT5A-dependent internalization of FZD2, FZD5 and ROR2	Internalization of FZD2, FZD5 and ROR2 after WNT5A binding is thought to occur in a clathrin-dependent manner and is required for the activation of RAC signaling (Kurayoshi et al, 2007; Sato et al, 2010; Hanaki et al, 2012; Yamamoto et al, 2009).
R-HSA-5099900	WNT5A-dependent internalization of FZD4	WNT5A induces internalization of FZD4 in a manner that depends upon PKC-mediated phosphorylation of DVL2. Uptake of FZD4 appears to occur in a clathrin, AP-2 and ARBB2-dependent mannner (Chen et al, 2003; Yu et al, 2007; Yu et al, 2010).
R-HSA-5545619	XAV939 inhibits tankyrase, stabilizing AXIN	XAV939 binds to the catalytic sites of tankyrase 1 and 2 and inhibits the ADP-ribosylation of AXIN1 and 2. Treatment of cells with XAV939 significantly increases the protein, but not the mRNA levels of AXIN1 and 2 and supports a strong increase in the level of GSK3beta-AXIN complexes. These cells also show increased phosphorylation of beta-catenin, decreased beta-catenin protein levels and a corresponding decrease in beta-catenin dependent transcription. Treatment of DLD-1 cells with XAV939 has also been shown to inhibit proliferation (Huang et al, 2009). XAV939 has not been tested in a clinical setting.
R-HSA-381038	XBP1(S) activates chaperone genes	Xbp-1 (S) binds the sequence CCACG in ER Stress Responsive Elements (ERSE, consensus sequence CCAAT (N)9 CCACG) located upstream from many genes. The ubiquitous transcription factor NF-Y, a heterotrimer, binds the CCAAT portion of the ERSE and together the IRE1-alpha: NF-Y complex activates transcription of a set of chaperone genes including DNAJB9, EDEM, RAMP4, p58IPK, and others. This results in an increase in protein folding activity in the ER.
R-HSA-211981	Xenobiotics	Of the 50 microsomal CYPs, 15 act on xenobiotics. They all possess wide substrate specificity to cater for most foreign compounds that find their way into the body.
R-HSA-2032785	YAP1- and WWTR1 (TAZ)-stimulated gene expression	YAP1 and WWTR1 (TAZ) are transcriptional co-activators, both homologues of the Drosophila Yorkie protein. They both interact with members of the TEAD family of transcription factors, and WWTR1 interacts as well with TBX5 and RUNX2, to promote gene expression. Their transcriptional targets include genes critical to regulation of cell proliferation and apoptosis. Their subcellular location is regulated by the Hippo signaling cascade: phosphorylation mediated by this cascade leads to the cytosolic sequestration of both proteins (Murakami et al. 2005; Oh and Irvine 2010).
R-HSA-1606322	ZBP1(DAI) mediated induction of type I IFNs	Z-DNA-binding protein-1 (ZBP1), also known as, DNA-dependent activator of IFN-regulatory factors (DAI) was reported to initiate innate immune responses in murine L929 cells upon stimulation by multiple types of exogenously added DNA (Takaoka A et al 2007). Human cytomegalovirus (HCMV) was shown to stimulate ZBP1-mediated induction of IRF3 in human foreskin (DeFilippis VR et al 2010). ZBP1 was also implicated in activation of NF-kappaB pathways in human embryonic kidney HEK293T cells (Kaiser WJ et al 2008, Rebsamen M et al 2009). However, the role and importance ofZBP1 as dsDNA sensor remain controversial, since knocking down ZBP1 expression in other human or murine cell types by siRNA had very little effect on cellular responses to cytosolic DNA, suggesting the presence of alternative pathway (Wang ZC et al 2008, Lippmann J et al 2008). Tissue-specific expression of human ZBP1 also suggests that ZBP1 may function in cell-type specific way (Rothenburg S et al 2002).<br>
R-HSA-435368	Zinc efflux and compartmentalization by the SLC30 family	The human SLC30 gene family of solute carriers is thought to participate in the homeostasis of zinc ions and facilitate zinc transport into specialized compartments of the cell such as endosomes, golgi network and synaptic vesicles. There are 10 members of this family, named ZnT1-10. ZnT4, ZnT9 and ZnT10 have no function determined as of yet (Palmiter RD and Huang L, 2004).
R-HSA-442380	Zinc influx into cells by the SLC39 gene family	The SLC39 gene family encode zinc transporters belonging to the ZIP (Zrt-, Irt-like proteins) family of metal ion transporters. All ZIPs transport metal ions into the cytoplasm of cells, be it across cellular membranes or from intracellular compartments. To date, there are 14 human SLC39 genes that encode the zinc transporters hZIP1-14. There are 9 members which belong to a subfamily of the ZIPs called the LZTs (LIV-1 subfamily of ZIP zinc transporters) (Taylor KM and Nicholson RI, 2003). Of these 14 proteins, four (hZIP9, 11, 12 and 13) have no function determined yet (Eide DJ, 2004).
R-HSA-435354	Zinc transporters	Zinc is an essential element for all organisms because it serves as a catalytic or structural cofactor for many different proteins. Cellular zinc homoeostasis is co-ordinated through Zn2+-specific transporters which are members of two distinct gene families. Members of the SLC39 gene family (ZRTL-like import proteins1-14, ZIP1-14) are responsible for Zn2+ import into the cytoplasm, either across the plasma membrane or out of intracellular organelles. In contrast, members of the SLC30 gene family (zinc transporters 1-10, ZnT1-10) export Zn2+ from the cytoplasm, either across the plasma membrane into the extracellular space or into intracellular organelles (Murakami M and Hirano T, 2008; Devirgiliis C et al, 2007; Eide DJ, 2006).
R-HSA-5663205	Infectious disease	???
R-HSA-382551	Transmembrane transport of small molecules	???
R-HSA-1640170	Cell Cycle	???
R-HSA-446728	Cell junction organization	???
R-HSA-453274	Mitotic G2-G2/M phases	???
R-HSA-73857	RNA Polymerase II Transcription	???
R-HSA-453276	Regulation of mitotic cell cycle	???
R-HSA-453279	Mitotic G1-G1/S phases	???
R-HSA-181431	Acetylcholine Binding And Downstream Events	???
R-HSA-166208	mTORC1-mediated signalling	mTORC1 integrates four major signals ? growth factors, energy status, oxygen and amino acids ? to regulate many processes that are involved in the promotion of cell growth. Growth factors stimulate mTORC1 through the activation of the canonical insulin and Ras signaling pathways. The energy status of the cell is signaled to mTORC1 through AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK), a key sensor of intracellular energy status (Hardie 2007). Energy depletion (low ATP:ADP ratio) activates AMPK which phosphorylates TSC2, increasing its GAP activity towards Rheb which reduces mTORC1 activation (Inoki et al. 2003). AMPK can reduce mTORC1 activity by directly phosphorylating Raptor (Gwinn et al. 2008). Amino acids positively regulate mTORC1 (reviewed by Guertin & Sabatini 2007). In the presence of amino acids, Rag proteins bind Raptor to promote the relocalization of mTORC1 from the cytoplasm to lysosomal membranes (Puertollano 2014) where it is activated by Rheb (Saucedo et al. 2003, Stocker et al. 2003). Translocation of mTOR to the lysosome requires active Rag GTPases and a complex known as Ragulator, a pentameric protein complex that anchors the Rag GTPases to lysosomes (Sancak et al. 2008, 2010, Bar-Peled et al. 2012). Rag proteins function as heterodimers, consisting of GTP-bound RagA or RagB complexed with GDP-bound RagC or RagD. Amino acids may trigger the GTP loading of RagA/B, thereby promoting binding to raptor and assembly of an activated mTORC1 complex, though a recent study suggested that the activation of mTORC1 is not dependent on Rag GTP charging (Oshiro et al. 2014). The activity of Rheb is regulated by a complex consisting of tuberous sclerosis complex 1 (TSC1), TSC2, and TBC1 domain family member 7 (TBC1D7) (Huang et al. 2008, Dibble et al. 2012). This complex localizes to lysosomes and functions as a GTPase-activating protein (GAP) that inhibits the activity of Rheb (Menon et al. 2014, Demetriades et al. 2014). In the presence of growth factors or insulin, TSC releases its inhibitory activity on Rheb, thus allowing the activation of mTORC1.
R-HSA-5653656	Vesicle-mediated transport	The transit of proteins and other cargo through the cell requires a cellular transport process in which transported substances are moved in membrane-bounded vesicles. Transported substances are enclosed in the vesicle lumen or located in the vesicle membrane. The transport process begins with the formation of the vesicle itself, often triggered by the interaction of the cargo with the vesicle formation machinery. Vesicular transport pathways can include vesicle formation, coating, budding, uncoating and target membrane fusion depending upon the function of the pathway described. Vesicle-mediated transport occurs from within cell via ER and Golgi transport, as well as functioning in the endocytosis of material taken into the cell via scavenger receptors.
